# G54_Wheat_disease_management_guide_2012.pdf

HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
Introduction This updated Wheat disease management guide Seed production and certification brings together the latest information on controlling economically important wheat diseases. Foliar, Certified seed stem-base, root and ear diseases are covered.
All seed bought and sold in the UK must be certified.
Reliance on repeated fungicide sprays has increased the Wheat quality standards (including varietal and species pressure for development of fungicide resistance. Some purity, germination, loose smut and ergot) are important mode of action groups have lost activity against prescribed in Cereal Seed Regulations issued by the major diseases. The guide describes how to account for UK within the EU-wide framework.
varietal resistance when making spray decisions.
EU member countries can prescribe stricter standards Most energy, greenhouse gas and economic costs are than the EU minimum. The UK sets a Higher Voluntary invested in crop establishment and nitrogen application, Standard (HVS) with higher standards for varietal and in order to grow green canopy. It is important to prevent species purity, ergot and loose smut. HVS seed is sold diseases destroying green area before it can repay the at a premium.
investment during grain filling.
Seed can be certified at various stages as a variety is commercialised. Second generation certified seed (C2) Other related HGCA information is the category normally bought for commercial production.
HGCA disease management guides are updated Certification and seed-borne disease annually with the latest fungicide information and The Cereal Seed Regulations state: "Harmful are available online at organisms which reduce the usefulness of the seed w.hgca.com/publications shall be at the lowest possible level." Standards exist The HGCA/BASF Encyclopaedia of Cereal for loose smut, currently rare in UK wheat, and ergot Diseases (2008) illustrates and describes but there are no standards for bunt or fungal seedling symptoms and life cycles of common and blights. Although not a requirement, most certified less frequently found diseases. seed is treated. The diseases controlled depend on the w.hgca.com/cde treatment.
CropMonitor – Get in-season information on emerging disease threats from w.cropmonitor.co.uk For HGCA mycotoxin risk assessment tools and information, visit w.hgca.com/mycotoxins For the Recommended List and the latest Naming of fungal diseases HGCA variety information, visit w.hgca.com/varieties Latin names of pathogenic fungi are agreed by international convention and these can change over time as new scientific RL Plus –This web-based tool allows you evidence emerges (eg Septoria triticiis now Mycosphaerella to interrogate HGCA variety data to suit graminicola). However, in some cases the original scientific your specific cropping requirements.
names have become widely used to describe the diseases w.hgca.com/varieties/rl-plus they cause (eg septoria tritici or septoria leaf blotch) – distinguished from Latin names by not being in italics. In general the most widely used common names are given in this guide.
2 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
Contents Page Seed sampling and testing 4 Farm-saved seed Quality seed can be grown and processed on farm. Seed-borne diseases 6 The aim should be to meet at least the minimum Bunt 6 certified seed standards.
Septoria seedling blight 6 Note: by law farm-saved seed cannot be Microdochium seedling blight 6 sold, shared or bartered.
Fusarium seedling blight 7 Any use of farm-saved seed must be declared to the British Society of Plant Breeders (BSPB). Most Seedling blight, foot rot and leaf spot 7 varieties are eligible for farm-saved seed payment; the Ergot 7 list is available at w.bspb.co.uk. This must be paid via a registered processor or directly to BSPB. Loose smut 7 Payments for previously zero-rated varieties will be Seed treatment 8 refunded immediately but declarations of these Foliar diseases 10 varieties are subject to verification by BSPB.
Organic seed production Septoria tritici 13 Organic certified seed must meet the same quality Septoria nodorum 14 standards as conventionally produced seed. No conventional seed treatments should be used on Yellow rust 15 organic certified or farm-saved seed. All seed Brown rust 16 considered for organic production should be tested for germination and seed-borne diseases. Tan spot 17 Powdery mildew 18 Root diseases 19 Take-all 19 Stem-base diseases 20 Eyespot 20 Ear diseases 21 Virus diseases 22 Assessing disease risk 23 Most recent name Previous Commonly Fungicide activity 24 name called Mycosphaerella Septoria Septoria Active ingredients for wheat disease control 25 graminicola tritici tritici Resistance management 26 Stagonospora nodorum or Septoria nodorum Septoria Phaeosphaeria nodorum nodorum Foliar diseases – Fungicide dose 27 Blumeria graminis Erysiphe graminis Powdery Fungicide performance curves 28 mildew Fungicide decision guide 30 Puccinia triticina Puccinia recondita Brown rust Further information 31 3


---
Seed sampling and testing By law, seed must be officially sampled and tested before it can be certified. Sampling and testing are also important for grain intended for farm-saved seed. The value of any seed test is limited by the sampling methodology used. It is vital to collect a representative sample of grain.
Sampling – Sample grain before cleaning or drying, ideally with a single or multi-chamber stick sampler – Wash equipment with water and detergent, before and between lots – Keep grain intended for sowing separate from larger grain bulks – Only use seed from one field to reduce variability within a seed lot – Subdivide seed lots over 30 tonnes into smaller lots – Sample across the bulk or trailer at different depths (each sample taken is a primary sample) – Thoroughly mix all primary samples in a clean bucket to create a 'composite sample' and divide for testing Primary samples required for given lot sizes Lot size (tonnes) Primary samples required <5* 10 5 10 10 20 20–30 40 * Seed treatment should only be used where necessary but with small seed lots it may be cheaper to treat than to sample and test for seed-borne diseases.
Figure 1. Preparing samples for testing Step 1. Check sample size required for tests. 300-500g Step 2. Thoroughly mix is normally sufficient for all primary samples in a germination and disease. clean bucket to create a ‘composite sample’.
Step 3. Pour onto a clean plastic sheet, Step 6. Weigh combined divide into two equal sample. If more seed is portions.
required, mix remaining samples. Repeat steps 3 to 5 until required sample weight is obtained.
Step 5. Take first and third Step 4. Halve each sample in one row and portion and halve again second and fourth in other to create eight equal row and combine.
portions. Arrange these in two rows of four.
4 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
Cleanliness and hygiene Germination testing Bunt spores can contaminate equipment and storage areas Low germination, due to disease, sprouting, drying, and diseased seed lots can contaminate healthy lots. Wash mechanical or chemical damage, is a major cause of poor all sampling equipment prior to starting sampling and quality in UK seed. Where time is limited, the tetrazolium (TZ) between lots using water, detergent and a brush. Dry test is recommended. This does not detect low germination equipment or allow it to dry before use. caused by disease damage but gives a good indication of potential germination after treatment for seedling blights.
Equipment The single chamber sampler (or "deep bin probe" or "Neate Seed health testing sampler") collects one primary sample at a time. Screw-on – Never sow untreated seed without testing for seed-borne extensions can be used if the depth of grain in the bulk is diseases, particularly bunt and microdochium seedling greater than the length of the sampler. blight.
– Test for ergot, loose smut, septoria and fusarium seedling The multi-chamber sampler usually has three or more blight if a problem is suspected.
chambers; all seed collected in this one sampling action equals one primary sample. It can be used to sample grain up to two metres deep and is suitable for most trailers. A piece of plastic guttering is useful for collecting samples from this type of sampler.
If you do not have access to appropriate equipment, have your grain sampled by a trained agronomist.
Regulatory standards and advisory thresholds Disease Bunt Microdochium seedling blight Septoria and fusarium seedling blights Ergot Loose smut Treat for seedling blights when sum of infection levels exceeds 10%.
At present seedling blight caused by Cochliobolus sativusis a low risk in UK wheat.
5



|                             |             |                                                                        |                                                                      |
|:----------------------------|:------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Method                      | Duration    | Results given as                                                       | Regulatory S tandard Advisory threshold                              |
| Wash                        | 48 hours    | Spores per seed                                                        | Treat if 1 spore/seed or more                                        |
| Molecular test              | 48 hours    | Either over or under 1 spore/seed                                      |                                                                      |
| Agar plate                  | 7-10 days   | % infection                                                            | Treat if over 10% infection                                          |
| Molecular                   | 48-72 hours | Either over or under 10% infection                                     |                                                                      |
| Agar plate                  | 7-10 days   | % infection                                                            | Treat if over 10% infection                                          |
| Visual 500g or 1000g search | 24 hours    | Number of pieces in 500g or 1000g                                      | Maximum pieces: 3 pieces/500g – minimum standard 1 piece/1000g – HVS |
| Embryo extraction           | 48 hours    | % infection in 1000 embryos (advisory) or 2000 embryos (certification) | Maximum infection: 0.5% – minimum standard 0.2% – HVS                |


---
Seed-borne diseases Bunt Septoria Microdochium seedling seedling –Tilletia tritici Symptoms blight blight Symptoms appear after ears – Phaeosphaeria – Microdochium nivale emerge. Plants are often stunted and nodorum and M. majus sometimes have yellow streaks along the flag leaf. Infected ears are dark grey- Symptoms Symptoms green with slightly gaping glumes. Bunt The most common effect is poor plant The most common symptom of a serious balls replace all grains and, if broken, establishment. Symptoms are so similar attack is poor establishment. The fungus release millions of black spores smelling to those of microdochium seedling can also cause root rotting, brown foot of rotten fish. blight that only laboratory analysis can rot, leaf blotch and, in combination with distinguish them. Septoria nodorum is fusarium species, ear blight.
Importance more commonly associated with Importance Bunt occurs at low levels in some seed necrotic blotching of leaves and glumes.
stocks. Contaminated grain may cause In most years microdochium seedling rejection. Importance blight occurs on wheat seed and is the Effects of septoria seedling blight are most important cause of seedling blight Life cycle usually less severe than microdochium in the UK. Sowing untreated seed with Spores on the seed surface germinate seedling blight. However, at high levels high levels of infection causes very poor with seeds.
crop establishment can be badly crop establishment leading to yield loss.
After invading shoots and growing affected. Life cycle points, the fungus grows within the Life cycle Inoculum (spores) are found in soil and plant until ear emergence when bunt While the disease can survive on plant on infected seed. Spores, released balls replace grain. The spores debris, most infections result from seed- when seedling blight or stem-base contaminate healthy grain during borne inoculum. browning occurs, are splashed up the harvest, transport and storage. Spores plant and ultimately infect the ear.
can land on soil or spread by wind to Risk factors Risk factors neighbouring fields. Soil-borne spores – High seed infection levels can invade seedlings very early in – Wet weather during flowering – Untreated seed sown into poor germination. seedbeds – High level of seed infection Risk factors – Cool, wet soils – Untreated seed sown into poor Seed-borne infection: seedbeds – Seed repeatedly sown without a – Late-sown crops fungicide treatment – Seedbed conditions leading to slow High infection of microdochium seedling blight (left) emergence Soil-borne infection:
– Very short time between harvesting first wheat and sowing second wheat – Dry soil conditions between harvesting and sowing 6 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
Fusarium seedling Ergot Loose smut blight – Claviceps – Ustilago nuda – Fusarium graminearum purpurea f. sp. tritici Symptoms Symptoms Symptoms Poor plant establishment is the most A hard, purple-black sclerotium, up to The ear is usually completely replaced common effect together with root 2cm long, replaces some grains in the by black fungal spores. Sometimes ears rotting, brown foot rot and ear blight. ear. are partly affected. Spores are released Importance as soon as the ear emerges leaving a Importance bare ear rachis with total grain loss.
Yield is hardly affected but ergot is At present Fusarium graminearum is the Blackened ears are so obvious that very highly poisonous to humans and only fusarium species that causes low incidence appears severe.
animals, so contaminated grain will be significant seedling losses in the UK.
rejected or require cleaning. Standards Importance Life cycle for number of ergot pieces exist for Seed certification and resistant varieties Inoculum occurs mainly on crop debris, certified seed. have minimised seed-borne infection.
but can be seed-borne. Spores are Life cycle Life cycle splashed up the plant to infect ears.
At or near harvest, ergots fall to the The fungus is present inside the Risk factors ground or are spread with contaminated embryo. As seed germinates the fungus – High levels of seed infection seed. They remain dormant until the grows within the plant and infects the – Sowing untreated seed into poor following summer, when they germinate ear at an early stage. Eventually, seedbeds and produce spores, encased in sticky spikelets are replaced with masses of – Maize in the rotation ‘honeydew’. Spores spread by wind to fungal spores which are released at ear open grass and cereal flowers nearby. emergence. Spores spread by wind to Rain splash or insects carry spores to nearby open flowers and infect Seedling blight, foot other flowers, leading to further developing grain sites on healthy plants.
rot and leaf spot infection. Risk factors Control – Cool, moist conditions during – Cochliobolus sativus No fungicide is effective against ergot. flowering Symptoms In the absence of host crops, ergots – Infected neighbouring crops Early symptoms include brown roots decay over 12 months. Check weed – Seed repeatedly sown without and coleoptiles. Infected plants with grasses and field margins for ergot.
treatment brown spotting on lower leaves usually Consider ploughing between host crops grow to maturity. Severe infections and break crops. Control cereal cause stem-base rotting and poorly filled volunteers and grass weeds.
ears.
Risk factors Importance – Grass weeds, particularly black-grass Cochliobolus sativus is traditionally a – Cool, wet conditions during flowering disease of hotter climates. Symptoms – Prolonged flowering periods only occasionally occur in the UK.
– Late tillering Life cycle The soil and seed-borne fungus survives on crop debris and grass weeds. It sometimes causes seedling blight. More usually it infects roots but the plant survives. Splash-borne spores infect seed in ears.
Risk factors – Any factor that slows germination and emergence, eg poor seedbeds – Extended periods of warm, moist weather 7


---
Seed treatment Certified seed Farm-saved seed Germination test 85% plus 78–84% Under 78% Considering sowing Is heat damage untreated? present?
Do not use YES NO NO YES for seed Test seed for bunt and microdochium seedling blight Test for septoria seedling blight if septoria nodorum is present in the growing crop Treat seed with an appropriate product ( see page 9) Does bunt exceed one YES spore/seed?
NO Do combined seedling YES diseases exceed 10%?
NO Very low risk of seed-borne disease, consider sowing seed untreated 8 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
Seed treatment options Updated annually, see w.hgca.com/diseasecontrol Key to company: Bs=BASF By=Bayer CropScience Ch=Chemtura Mo=Monsanto MA=Makhteshim-Agan Sy=Syngenta (cid:0) label recommendation (cid:2) some known activity, but no label recommendation 9



|                                         | Product            | Seed-borne diseases   |                  |            |         | Other diseases   |            |           |             |                  |            |                      |
|:----------------------------------------|:-------------------|:----------------------|:-----------------|:-----------|:--------|:-----------------|:-----------|:----------|:------------|:-----------------|:-----------|:---------------------|
|                                         |                    | Bunt                  | Seedling blights | Loose smut | Ergot   | Bunt soil-borne  | Blue mould | Take- all | Yellow rust | Septoria tritici | Brown rust | Virus vector control |
|                                         | Anchor Ch          | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          |            | (cid:2) |                  | (cid:2)    |           |             |                  |            |                      |
| clothianidin                            | Deter By           |                       |                  |            |         |                  |            |           |             |                  |            | (cid:0)              |
|                                         | Redigo Deter By    | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    | (cid:2) | (cid:0)          | (cid:2)    |           |             |                  |            | (cid:0)              |
| difenconazole, fludioxonil              | Celest Extra Sy    | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          |            | (cid:2) | (cid:0)          | (cid:2)    |           |             |                  |            |                      |
|                                         | Beret Gold Sy      | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          |            | (cid:2) | (cid:0)          | (cid:2)    |           |             |                  |            |                      |
| fludioxonil, flutriafol                 | Beret Multi Sy     | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    | (cid:2) | (cid:0)          | (cid:2)    |           |             |                  |            |                      |
|                                         | Austral Plus Sy    | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          |            | (cid:2) | (cid:0)          | (cid:2)    |           |             |                  |            |                      |
| fluoxastrobin, prothioconazole          | Redigo Twin By TXC | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    |         | (cid:0)          |            |           |             |                  |            |                      |
|                                         | Galmano By         | (cid:0)               |                  |            | (cid:2) | (cid:2)          |            | (cid:0)   | (cid:0)     | (cid:0)          | (cid:2)    |                      |
| fluquinconazole                         | Jockey Solo Bs     | (cid:0)               |                  |            | (cid:2) | (cid:2)          |            | (cid:0)   | (cid:0)     | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    |                      |
|                                         | Galmano Plus By    | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          |            | (cid:2) | (cid:2)          |            | (cid:0)   | (cid:0)     | (cid:0)          | (cid:2)    |                      |
| fluquinconazole, prochloraz             | Jockey Bs          | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          |            | (cid:2) | (cid:2)          |            | (cid:0)   | (cid:0)     | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    |                      |
|                                         | Epona Bs           | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          |            | (cid:2) | (cid:0)          |            |           | (cid:0)     | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    |                      |
| fuberidazole, imidacloprid, triadimenol | Tripod Plus MA     | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    | (cid:0) | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    |           | (cid:0)     | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    | (cid:0)              |
|                                         | Tripod MA          | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    | (cid:0) | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    |           | (cid:0)     | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    |                      |
| prothioconazole                         | Redigo By          | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    | (cid:2) | (cid:0)          | (cid:2)    |           |             |                  |            |                      |
|                                         | Redigo Pro By      | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    |         |                  |            |           |             |                  |            | (cid:0)              |
| prochloraz, triticonazole               | Kinto Bs           | (cid:0)               | (cid:0)          | (cid:0)    | (cid:2) |                  |            |           |             |                  |            |                      |
|                                         |                    |                       |                  |            |         | (cid:0)          |            |           |             |                  |            |                      |
|                                         | Latitude Mo        |                       |                  |            |         |                  |            | (cid:0)   |             |                  |            |                      |


---
Foliar diseases Impact on yield formation Most foliar diseases accelerate senescence of the top three leaves and so reduce yield. Fungicide sprays during canopy growth prevent green leaf area loss during grain filling.
Construction phase Flag leaf and ear contribute 65% of total yield Canopy growth: Canopy expansion accelerates in April/May as temperatures rise and large upper leaves emerge. The maximum green area of leaves and stems (measured as Ear green area index – GAI) is reached as ears emerge, just before grain filling begins.
Flag leaf – Leaf 1 Stem reserve accumulation: During stem extension, stored soluble carbohydrates accumulate in the stem.
Leaf 2 Applying sprays during this critical phase – at T1 (GS32) and T2 (GS39) – limits disease progress and protects emerging Leaf 3 upper leaves, so maximising photosynthesis later.
Production phase Leaf 4 Grain filling: In this six to seven week period, up to 80% of yield comes from photosynthesis. On bright days, yield Leaf 5 typically increases by 0.2t/ha/day. In this phase, stem reserve relocation accounts for 20% of grain filling. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 A fungicide at full ear emergence may help prevent Contribution to yield (%) premature leaf loss.
7 6 5 AI) G e ( 4 z si p y 3 o n a C 2 1 0 25 a) h r (t/ 20 e att m y 15 r d d n u o 10 r g ev o b a 5 al ot T 0 10 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012



| Slow expansion Soil-borne, seed-borne, root and stem-base diseases reduce canopy establishment and expansion   | Rapid expansion T2 T3 T1 Sprays applied to control foliar diseases GS30 GS32 GS39 GS59   | Senescence Foliar diseases cause early senescence, loss of GAI and yield Crop protected from disease H e a lth D iseased y GS71   |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Jan Feb Mar Emergence Fla of the final 4 leaves First nod                                                      | Apr May Ju Watery ripe GS71 Flowering GS61 g leaf emerged GS39 e GS31                    | n Jul Aug Sep Hard dough GS87 Healthy                                                                                             |
| Foundation phase                                                                                               | Construction phase                                                                       | Production phase                                                                                                                  |


---
Infection and development Initial infection Infection usually results from spores Importance of spray timing and latent period moving into the crop. When this occurs depends on the disease. For example, by Spore lands Fungus penetrates Fungus grows Symptoms appear spring, septoria tritici is present on the on leaf leaf inside leaf on leaf lower leaves of most crops.
Disease development Infection is followed by a ‘latent period’ when the fungus grows within the leaf Latent period but the leaf exhibits no symptoms.
Fungal growth beyond Fungicides effective in this period chemical control The cycle of leaf emergence, infection, latent period and symptom expression No disease symptoms visible applies to all foliar diseases. The latent period varies considerably between Latent periods can be as short as 4–5 days for mildew and brown rust. Strategies pathogens and is affected by to manage these diseases depend largely on protecting leaves as they emerge.
temperature. At higher temperatures, latent periods are shorter.
Septoria tritici has a very long latent period (14–28 days). Many modern fungicides cancontrol disease after a leaf becomes infected but only for about half of the latent period. In the summer, septoria tritici may have a latent period of 14 days, but fungicides provide Latent periods, fungicide activity and spray timing eradicant controlfor only about seven days. Although there may be no Example based on septoria tritici symptoms on a leaf, infection may be so far into the latent period that no GS32 GS33 GS39 GS59 Leaf 3 just emerged Leaf 2 just emerged Flag leaf emerged Ear emerged fungicide at any dose will control the fungus. Latent First spores arrive First spores arrive infection (no symptoms) Infection from within crops Leaf 1 Leaf 1 (flag leaf) As stems extend and upper leaves First spores Latent infection Latent Leaf 2 emerge, the crop tends to grow away arrive (no symptoms) Leaf 2 infection First lesion (no symptoms) from the disease. Newly emerged Leaf 2 leaves always appear free from septoria First tritici between GS32 and GS39. Leaf 3 Leaf 3 Leaf 3 lesion Leaf 3 10–14 days 10–14 days 10–14 days However, the crucial final three leaves Severe are at risk as soon as they emerge. By lesions this stage, most inoculum comes from within the crop and spore movement from other fields is much less Leaf 4 and below Leaf 3 infected but Leaf 3 may now be Symptoms now visible important. Rusts and powdery mildew already showing disease still in latent showing symptoms – on leaves 2 and 3, not have very short latent periods and can symptoms. Disease on period and controllable. disease not now controllable by ear be found before leaves have fully these leaves cannot controllable on this sprays. Ear sprays top now be controlled. Leaf 2 just infected. leaf layer. up protectant activity expanded.
on the flag leaf.
Leaf 3 can be Leaf 2 infected but still In the absence of fungicide use, the protected. in latent period, so final severity of disease is determined disease controllable by by variety and weather. flag leaf sprays.
11


---
T1 T2 Flag leaf Leaf 2 Leaf 3 )%( lortnoc esaesiD )%( lortnoc esaesiD )%( lortnoc esaesiD Foliar diseases Spray timing Foliar treatments Main timings To ensure adequate protection of the key yield-forming T1 timing–Leaf 3 emerged (usually coincides with GS32, but leaves, fungicide treatments should be targeted to leaf can be as early as GS31 or as late as GS33).
emergence, rather than growth stage. Full emergence of leaf T2 timing–Flag leaf emerged (GS39).
3 usually coincides with GS32 but this can vary between Applying both T1 and T2 sprays at optimal timings gives effective crops. Very early sowing can lead to leaf 3 emerging as late disease control on the top three leaves –those most important as GS33 but leaf 3 may emerge at GS31 in late-sown crops.
in grain filling.
Leaf emergence is, therefore, the best guide for decisions on spray timings. With practice, this can be assessed quickly in Additional timings the field. Growth stages provide a second best option.
T0 timing–Usually two to four weeks earlier than T1.
Spray window Instances where a T0 spray may be considered include:
The ‘spray window’ for effective disease control on a – To delay septoria tritici development particular leaf layer is relatively narrow. The optimum spray – Where mildew, yellow or brown rusts are active timing is when a leaf has just fully emerged.
– When eyespot requires earlier treatment – Spraying too early, when the leaf is not fully emerged, T3 timing– Ear spray results in insufficient spray on the leaf and poor control May be used to control ear diseases and 'top up' foliar – Spraying too late means the disease is already established disease control on the flag leaf on susceptible varieties under and results in poor control, especially with protectant high disease pressure.
fungicides Effects of spray timing on disease control The optimum T1 spray gives maximum The optimum T2 spray gives maximum disease control on disease control on leaf 3, and provides the flag leaf and eradicates any latent infections on leaf 2 some protection for leaf 2. that have escaped earlier sprays.
100 80 60 40 20 0 100 80 60 40 These graphs were produced from 20 trials. Sprays were applied at frequent 0 intervals across a range of growth stages. Each curve shows the level of 100 control achieved on each of the top 80 three leaves for the spray timings from 60 GS31 to GS59. The interval between T1 40 and T2 is important. Disease control on upper leaves will be lost if the interval 20 extends beyond three weeks, especially 0 GS31 GS32 GS33 GS39 GS59 when diseases with short life cycles, eg Time of spray application rusts or powdery mildew, are active.
12 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
Foliar diseases – Septoria tritici Septoria tritici Spread of pycnidiospores up plants by contact and rain splash Mycosphaerella graminicola Pseudothecia and pycnidia sometimes known as leaf blotch In autumn and spring, develop within lesions crops infected by airborne ascospores perithecia pycnidia (wind blown) (rain splash) ascospores Overwinters as mycelium, pycnidia and pseudothecia on crop debris, autumn-sown crops and volunteers Risk factors High – Susceptible varieties Moderate – Early sowing – Rainfall: high-risk septoria Low periods occur during ‘splashy’ or prolonged rain, especially in May and early June Symptoms Mild winters and wet, windy In autumn and winter, brown oval leaf spots (lesions) which conditions in early spring increase risk.
contain the diagnostic small black fruiting bodies (pycnidia) occur on older leaves. Several lesions may turn large areas of Control leaf brown. In spring andsummer, lesions areusually Varieties rectangular and confined by leaf veins. Leaf lesions are often The HGCA Recommended List 2012/13 contains varieties surrounded by areas of leaf yellowing or death.During rapid with resistance ratings from 4 to 7 so a fungicide treatment development, water-soaked lesions graduallyturning brown is likely to be necessary in most instances. However, a lower may be present.
dose is required for effective control on more resistant Importance varieties.
Septoria tritici is the most damaging foliar disease of UK Cultural wheat, causing significant yield loss every year. Infection Avoid very early sowing of susceptible varieties.
occurs in all crops. Unusually dry weather throughout May Fungicides and June may reduce losses.Higher rainfall areas in the south Control relies on using robust rates of azole fungicides at T1 and west are most at risk.
and T2, in mixture with a fungicide of a different mode of CropMonitor national survey data showed that septoria tritici action; usually an SDHI (bixafen, isopyrazam, fluxapyroxad or was the most common foliar disease in 2010/2011, affecting boscalid) and/or chlorothalonil.
56% of crops. Crops had an average of 1% of the area of leaf Resistance to strobilurin products is widespread and they are 2 affected at GS75, continuing a downward trend in severity of unlikely to be effective.
the disease.
Some systemic seed treatments (eg fluquinconazole) may give Life cycle limited early control.
Airborne spores disperse in autumn/winter from previous wheat stubbles. These ascospores infect leaves to produce leaf spots For more information, from mid-autumn onwards and then spread by rain splash and see Topic Sheet 113.
physical contact between leaves.
w.hgca.com/publications Heavy rainfall encourages rapid spore movement from lower to upper leaves during stem extension. Optimum temperatures are 15–20ºC.
Symptoms appear after a latent period (14–28 days after infection); this period reduces as temperatures rise.
13


---
Foliar diseases – Septoria nodorum Septoria nodorum Life cycle The pathogen survives in crop residues, volunteers and wild Phaeosphaeria (Stagonospora) nodorum grasses. It can be seed-borne. Airborne ascospores from Sometimes known as leaf and glume blotch wheat stubbles spread infection to newly-emerged crops.
Secondary spread occurs when pycnidiospores, produced within leaf spots, are dispersed by rain splash.
Symptoms appear within 7–14 days. The disease can develop very rapidly in warm temperatures (20–27ºC) with long periods (6–16 hours) of high humidity.
Leaves and ear infected by contact and rain splash In spring, crops also infected by pycnidiospores and ascospores pycnidiospores ascospores Seed infection Overwinters on crop debris, grass weeds and volunteers Seed infection causes damping off and early infection of plant Risk factors High – Susceptible varieties Moderate – High rainfall during and after Symptoms ear emergence Low On leaves, symptoms are mainly oval brown lesions with a – South-west and coastal small yellowish halo. Pale brown, rather than black, pycnidia locations distinguish septoria nodorumfrom septoria tritici.The indistinct Control brown pycnidia may be only visible when lesions are held up to the light. Under high disease pressure, leaf symptoms can Varieties include small purplish-brown spots. The HGCA Recommended List 2012/13 contains varieties with resistance ratings from 5 to 8.
On ears, symptoms are typically purplish-brown blotches on Resistant varieties are preferred in high-risk areas.
glumes.
Cultural Importance Ploughing or cultivation to bury crop residues after harvest Septoria nodorum was not recorded in the 2010/2011 may provide some control.
CropMonitor national survey. When severe attacks occur, it is Fungicides usually in association with high rainfall at ear emergence (eg T1 and T2 sprays applied to control other diseases usually in the south west). Here yield losses in untreated crops may control septoria nodorum on the leaves. When risk is high, a exceed 50%.
T3 protectant ear spray is important.
14 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
Foliar diseases – Yellow rust Y Yellow rust Summer Disease Puccinia striiformis spread by Pustules erupt wind releasing dispersal uredospores Late in the season black telia form on leaves Early infection of plants Autumn by wind-borne uredospores Teliospores produce Spring Overwinters on basidia and basidiospores volunteer plants Alternate host (Berberis spp.) Risk factors – Large variation between years High in epidemic risk Moderate – Overwinter survival is critical Low – Problems occur after mild Symptoms winters and on susceptible Groups of yellow pustules forming stripes between veins are varieties the main symptoms. Under hot, dry conditions – or after – Cold winters with several frosts fungicide use – pustules may be difficult to detect.
below -5ºC reduce survival In spring, small patches (foci) of leaves with scattered yellow – New races continue to develop that overcome the major pustules precede rapid spread throughout the field. gene resistance of some new varieties Ears can also be affected.
Control Importance Varieties Varieties with resistance ratings of 7 and 8 on the HGCA New races developed in 2009 and 2011. Full implications for Recommended List give effective control and may be less varietal resistance are still being determined.
prone to sudden loss of resistance than varieties with a rating Severe epidemics can occur where large areas of susceptible of 9. The wheat yellow rust diversification scheme is varieties are grown. In untreated susceptible varieties, yellow designed to help growers choose combinations of varieties in rust can reduce yields by over 50%. However, well-timed such a way as to reduce the risk of crop loss due to disease fungicide sprays are usually very effective so annual losses spreading from one variety to another (see Topic Sheet 112).
are small. Outbreaks often occur in coastal areas from Essex Cultural to the Borders and central England.
Control volunteers that provide a ‘green bridge’ between Life cycle harvest and emergence of new crops.
Epidemics are associated with mild winters that enable the Fungicides pathogen to overwinter in crops and volunteers. Cold winters Azole and most strobilurin products are very effective; some with severe frosts restrict its survival. SHDIs also have good activity. Systemic seed treatments (eg In early spring, distinct foci may occur; secondary spread is fluquinconazole or triadimenol) may delay epidemic through airborne spores as well as leaf-to-leaf contact. Cool development where risk is high.
(10–15ºC), damp weather, with overnight dew or rain, provides optimum conditions for disease development. For more information, see Topic Sheet 112.
UK weather conditions are unlikely to limit development in w.hgca.com/publications spring or early summer. Symptoms appear 7–14 days after infection so leaf tips may show symptoms before leaves fully emerge. Hot, dry weather with temperaturesover 25°C limit development.
15


---
Foliar diseases – Brown rust Brown rust Pustules of brown Most rapid spread uredia erupt from occurs at high Puccinia triticina the leaf releasing temperature, late Late in the uredospores in the season season black telia form on leaf surface Teliospores produce basidia and basidiospores.
Aecidial stage found on alternate host (Ornithogalum) Slow disease but rare in UK development in spring – Overwinters on infection by wind-borne volunteers uredospores Risk factors High – Seasonal weather–the Moderate disease is normally most Low active when June and July temperatures are high Symptoms – In 2007, above average temperatures led to Most commonly seen as tiny orange-brown pustules unusually early epidemics; scattered over leaves. During autumn and winter, a few with higher than average pustules, confined to older leaves, may be seen. While the temperatures in March 2012, a similar situation may arise pustules can be a similar colour to those of yellow rust, they usually have a chlorotic halo. – High humidity is necessary for epidemic progress – Susceptible varieties Late in the season, brown rust can become very severe and cause leaf death. Leaf sheaths and ears are also affected. – Early sowing Black spots occur on maturing crops when pustules produce – New races continue to develop that overcome the major a second, teliospore stage. gene resistance of some new varieties Importance Control There is large seasonal and geographic variation in brown rust Varieties severity. The disease is more common in southern and Resistant varieties provide good control. Varieties on the HGCA eastern England on susceptible varieties. Recommended List 2012/13 have ratings from 3-9. In 2011, new races of brown rust appeared. Full implications for varietal Brown rust had been absent in the 2009/2010 CropMonitor resistance are being determined. Most current UK wheat national survey but was seen in 2011 at its greatest incidence varieties are very, or moderately, susceptible, but some have since 2008, with nearly 8% of crops affected. In 2007, a good resistance.
season when brown rust was prevalent, the estimated cost of yield loss was £11.2 million. Cultural Control volunteers that provide a ‘green bridge’ between Life cycle harvest and emergence of new crops. Susceptible varieties Brown rust overwinters in crops and on volunteers. It spreads should not be sown early in September.
by airborne spores. Cold winters may reduce its survival.
Fungicides Optimum conditions are days with high temperatures Products containing azoles, strobilurins and SDHIs are very (15–22ºC) followed by overnight dews. Surface moistureon effective. In a programme, treatment intervals should not leaves is essential for spore germination. exceed three to four weeks; they should be substantially shorter under high disease pressure.
Symptoms can appear in 5–6 days at optimum temperatures.
The disease is active over a wider range of temperature Systemic seed treatments (eg fluquinconazole) may help (7–25ºC) than yellow rust. delay epidemics developing where risk is high. However, seed treatments are likely to provide less control of brown rust than yellow rust.
16 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
Foliar diseases – Tan spot Tan spot Typical eyeRain splash shaped leaf moves spotting Pyrenophora (Drechslera) tritici-repentis conidia symptoms up plant occur causing re-infection At end of season pseudothecia develop Overwinters as Primary infection results seed-borne from conidia and ascospores mycelium and as pseudothecia on crop debris Life cycle Like septoria nodorum, tan spot is trash-borne and favoured by minimum tillage. Ascospores produced on stubble, probably in spring, introduce the disease into crops. Leaf lesions appear in 7–14 days and produce splash-dispersed asexual spores.
High temperatures (20–28ºC) and rain causing long periods of leaf wetness are ideal for tan spot development.
Risk factors High – Minimum and non-inversion Moderate tillage Symptoms – Long periods of wet weather Low from GS32 onwards Tan spot symptoms are variable. Small tan, or brown, flecks develop into pale-brown oval spots with dark centres. These Control lesions sometimes have a chlorotic halo. Numerous lesions Varieties can coalesce into large necrotic areas. Symptoms are very Resistance ratings are not similar to those of septoria nodorum and diagnosis relies on currently available on the HGCA spore identification.
Recommended List.
Importance Cultural Tan spot is still a minor UK disease but appears to be Ploughing or cultivation to bury infected crop residues.
becoming more common. The 2010/2011 CropMonitor Fungicides national survey showed tan spot to be the third most Fungicidal control is difficult due to the short latent period but commonly occurring disease for the third successive year, older azoles used in the spring to protect crops from rust (eg with over 20% of crops affected. Some severe cases have tebuconazole, cyproconazole and propiconazole) will help to occurred in recent years and it is a major problem in Sweden, protect crops from early infection.
Denmark, Germany and France.
Strobilurin resistance in tan spot has been confirmed elsewhere in Europe and is likely to be present in the UK.
17


---
Foliar diseases – Powdery mildew Powdery mildew Re-infection of leaf layers by airborne conidia Blumeria graminis Mycelium develops on young plants and conidiophores release conidia Cleistothecia develop on lower leaves In spring, conidia and ascospores start early infections Overwinters as mycelium and cleistothecia on autumn-sown crops and wheat volunteers Life cycle Airborne conidia, produced on crops or volunteers, enable mildew to spread widely. Warm (15–22ºC), breezy conditions with short periods of high humidity favour infection. New pustules are produced in 5–14 days.
Temperatures over 25ºC and rain can inhibit development.
Sexually-produced spores provide a mechanism for summer survival when leaf growth has slowed.
Risk factors High – Susceptible variety Moderate – Sheltered fertile sites Low – High nitrogen – Warm dry, but humid, Symptoms weather White fluffy colonies of pustules often occur on leaves from autumn onwards. Control Varieties On yellowing leaves,pustules retain a distinctive ‘green island’.
The HGCA Recommended List 2012/13 contains varieties with Severe mildew can cover almost the entire leaf surface and resistance ratings from 3 to 9.
develop on ears and stems.
Cultural Later in the season, pinhead-sized, black fruiting bodies Avoid excessive nitrogen fertilisation.
(cleistothecia) that produce sexual spores (ascospores) may be found on the white colonies. Fungicides Fungicides with specific activity against mildew are required Importance where powdery mildew is a particular threat. Some Mildew can develop over a wide range of conditions but is treatments, applied at T0 or T1, provide long-term protection.
sporadic, often affecting crops under stress. Although very Fungicide resistance is known to affect the performance of visible, it generally reduces yield much less than other foliar various fungicide groups (eg strobilurins, azoles, morpholines).
diseases. Damaging attacks can occur anywhere in the UK but yield losses rarely exceed 10%.
The 2010/2011 CropMonitor national survey showed that mildew levels remained similar to those recorded in previous years and the long-term mean, with an average of 0.1% mildew on leaf 2 at GS75 and more than 30% of crops affected.
18 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
Root diseases – Take-all Take-all Control Cultural Gaeumannomyces graminis var. tritici Control relies largely on rotation and good soil management and husbandry. Reducing the severity in second and subsequent wheats is achieved by delaying drilling compared with first wheats and maintaining good soil structure and nutrient levels.
Varieties All varieties are susceptible to take-all but some are more tolerant in the presence of disease. The HGCA Recommended List yields for second wheats give some guidance to choosing the most suitable varieties for second and subsequent sowings. Yield responses reflect take-all tolerance and eyespot resistance. Varieties known to perform well as second wheats include Duxford, Grafton and Ketchum.
Fungicides Seed treatments based on silthiofam and fluquinconazole can help to reduce the effects of take-all, particularly when used Symptoms in conjunction with cultural control measures. Seed Take-all can infect plants at a low level without causing treatments do not alter the optimum sowing date but can obvious symptoms. However, moderate or severe infection delay the take-all epidemic and reduce the yield penalty from reduces the number of active roots over winter, which sowing second wheats early.
restricts canopy growth. Infection of the crown (adventitious) Azoxystrobin or fluoxastrobin applied at T1 timing can help roots in the spring and early summer restricts water and suppress take-all.
nutrient uptake, resulting in patches of whiteheads (bleached ears) as grain fills.
Importance Take-all is the major cause of ‘second wheat syndrome’ when yields of second wheat crops are frequently 10–15% less than those of first wheats.
Take-all is usually most severe in the second to fourth 8.0 successive cereal crop but yields generally recover to some Silthiofam 7.8 extent in continuous cereals – ‘take-all decline’. 7.6 Untreated Take-all causes most damage on light soils where loss of 7.4 7.2 active roots has a large effect on water and nutrient uptake.
7.0 Even on chalky boulder clay soils with high water-holding 6.8 6.6 capacity, losses of 10% are common in second and third 6.4 wheat crops. On less well-bodied soils, yield losses can be 1 Oct 11 Oct 21 Oct 31 Oct 10 Nov 20 Nov much higher, so it may be uneconomic to grow second or Drilling date subsequent wheat crops.
Risk factors – High pH increases disease risk but severe attacks can also For further information occur in acidic patches – Poor drainage, low nutrient status and particularly early See Take-all in winter wheat – sowing and light, puffy seedbeds, encourage the disease management guidelines, HGCA (2006).
– Cereal volunteers and grass weeds, especially couch, in w.hgca.com/publications break crops will carry the disease through to following cereals 19 )ah/t( dleiY Seed treatment does not alter optimum sowing date Optimum sowing date for second wheats with or without treatment HGCA-funded trials, ADAS Rosemaund


---
Stem-base diseases – Eyespot Stem-base diseases can be difficult to distinguish, particularly early in the season when treatment decisions are made. Identification is necessary because eyespot is much more important than sharp eyespot (Rhizoctonia cerealis) and fusarium foot rot. During stem extension, lesions caused by fusarium and sharp eyespot are generally confined to the outer leaf sheath. Some fungicides give incidental sharp eyespot control but specific treatment is difficult to justify.
Eyespot Risk factors Traditionally, eyespot assessment in wheat crops was carried Oculimacula acuformis (R-type) out in the spring (GS30-31) to judge the need for chemical Oculimacula yallundae (W-type) control. A new risk assessment method has been developed that includes an early, pre-sowing, assessment of agronomic risks. This enables fields at greater disease risk to be identified, allowing an integrated management approach.
Risk is highest:
– In the west – On heavy soil – Where the previous crop was wheat or another cereal – With ploughing – Where crops are sown early Control Varieties Eyespot-resistant varieties on the HGCA Recommended List 2012/13 include Battalion, Beluga, Cocoon, Grafton, Humber and Scout.
Fungicides Good control is difficult to achieve and may be affected by the type of eyespot present. Many treatments only reduce severity.
Prothioconazole or boscalid (the latter in mix with epoxiconazole), control both eyespot and septoria tritici well – a useful option at T1. Higher doses are usually required for eyespot control. Specific eyespot treatments should be Symptoms applied at GS30-31 if high risk justifies early treatment.
Eyespot affects the stem base of winter wheat from autumn onwards. Lesions appear as red-brown blotches. Mixed R Yield response to foliar disease control usually exceeds and W-type eyespot infections occur in most UK crops. response from eyespot treatment. However, delaying Symptoms may disappear as leaf sheaths die off during treatment until GS32 – for better disease control on leaf 3 – spring growth but can reappear later. may compromise eyespot control, especially if disease levels are high on susceptible varieties.
Importance Some control may be achieved at GS37 if eyespot has not Eyespot reduces yield and quality by restricting water and penetrated the stem base.
nutrient uptake. Yield losses may be large, particularly in early-sown crops. Severe eyespot can cause lodging from weakened stems. Even without lodging, severe eyespot can For the eyespot risk assessment reduce yield by 10–30%. and more information, see Topic Sheet 111.
w.hgca.com/publications 20 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
Ear diseases Diseases can affect grain quality by reducing grain filling, leading to low specific weights and shrivelled grain. Infections of fusarium and michrodochium species may result in mycotoxins. Sooty moulds, and similar diseases, may affect grain appearance causing rejection for milling.
Foliar diseases that affect the ear Seed-borne ear diseases Septoria nodorum is potentially the most damaging to yield. Details of diseases such as bunt, ergot and smut can be In south-west England, foliar and ear infections can cause found at pages 6 and 7.
yield losses of up to 70%.
Control of ear diseases Yellow rust infects ears in severe cases.
Sprays applied after ear emergence:
Brown rust can also affect ears.
– Top-up protection for flag leaf and leaf 2 against foliar Powdery mildew although very obvious on ears, does not disease cause large yield losses.
– Protect the newly-emerged ear against foliar diseases Specific ear diseases – Protect against specific ear diseases Sooty moulds are caused by a mixture of fungi, mainly – Limit mycotoxin accumulation Cladosporium and Alternaria species, which grow on glume surfaces in wet weather or on prematurely ripened ears. They Sprays applied around GS59 can help maintain canopy size cause little yield loss but can discolour grain, which affects and prolong its duration by protecting leaf and ear green area marketability, particularly for milling. against disease. For ear blight control, spray during anthesis (GS61-65).
Fusarium ear (or head) blights are caused by a range of fusarium species and Microdochium nivale and Microdochium The T3 ear spray should be considered where it is necessaryto majus. ‘top-up’ disease control on the flag leaf and/or to protect the ear from disease. If no T3 spray is planned, it is important not In UK wheat, the main mycotoxin-producingspecies are to delay the T2 spray. Delaying the T2 sprayto allow part of the Fusarium culmorum, Fusarium graminearum and Fusarium ear to emerge will leadto poorer foliar disease control on the avenaceum which all produce similar symptoms. The presence critical flag leaf and leaf 2.
of ear blight is not a good indicator of likely mycotoxin risk in UK crops.
Legislation imposes a limit for deoxynivalenol (DON) in grain for human consumption of 1250 parts per billion. In most years few UK grain samples have exceeded this limit.
Risk of mycotoxin formation can increase if:
– Maize preceded the wheat crop NB: ploughing maize residues reduces risk For the latest information on – Wet weather occurred during flowering fusarium mycotoxins and the risk Fungicide treatment can help reduce ear blight and mycotoxin assessment, see:
risk provided the recommended rate is used as near to w.hgca.com/mycotoxins infection time as possible.
Septoria Yellow rust Mildew Sooty Fusarium Fusarium Fusarium Fusarium nodorum moulds poae culmorum graminearum avenaceum 21


---
Virus diseases Barley yellow dwarf virus (BYDV) Control Control measures aim to prevent infection and reduce spread.
Symptoms Cultural In wheat, infections cause Good stubble hygiene and an interval of five weeks between leaf yellowing and stunting, ploughing and sowing help prevent transmission via the initially confined to single ‘green bridge’ (ie aphids on grass weeds and volunteers).
plants scattered randomly in a field. Distinct circular Chemical patches develop later as Insecticidal seed treatments can provide four to six weeks’ secondary spread occurs. protection for early-sown crops in high-risk areas. An aphicide spray can prevent wingless second and third generation Importance aphids spreading disease within the crop.
BYDV is most damaging Development time for each generation depends on when young plants are temperature. An accumulated sum of 170 day-degrees above infected in autumn.
3°C is necessary to produce a generation (the ‘T-sum 170’).
Economic loss from a Treatments are timed to coincide with the production of severe infection can make second generation aphids in a crop, at T-sum 170. The T-sum the crop unprofitable.
170 is calculated either following emergence or the end of Substantial yield loss is seed treatment protection.
rare in spring-sown crops.
Treatments at T-sum 340 may be justified where aphids Life cycle continue to fly after the T-sum 170 spray.
BYDV is transmitted by the grain aphid and the bird cherry Decisions on whether to treat crops emerging in September aphid. Grain aphids fly into crops during late summer and must be made by the start of October. The treatment window autumn, spreading disease. The LT50 (lethal temperature for is wider for later-emerging crops.
50% mortality) for grain aphid is -8°C. The bird cherry-oat aphid is more frost-susceptible, with an LT50 of 0.5°C.
Soil-borne cereal mosaic virus (SBCMV) Soil-borne wheat mosaic virus (SBWMV) The viruses are transmitted by the soil-borne organism Polymyxa graminis and can remain viable in soil for at least 15 years. The viruses are spread by any movement of soil infested with Polymyxa graminis containing SBCMV or SBWMV particles.
Symptoms Symptoms vary from pale green to prominent yellow streaks on leaves and leaf sheaths, accompanied by moderate to Risk factors severe stunting. Infections usually occur in distinct patches – Early crop emergence that increase in size in successive years.
– Mild winters Importance – Sowing after grass Mosaic virus is present in the UK but symptoms are not commonly found.
Control Once land is infected by SBCMV or SBWMV, the only practicable means of control is to grow resistant varieties.
22 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
Assessing disease risk Disease pressure must be balanced against The susceptibility of varieties to each disease is partly reflected in the yield response to fungicides. Other factors field resistance may affect varietal yield response:
Crop protection decisions need to be taken as upper leaves emerge, well before symptoms develop on yield-forming leaves. – Differing yield sensitivity to disease (tolerance) To estimate the chance of disease development, the likelihood of – Diseases have differing effects on yield infection –'disease pressure' –has to be balanced against the – Fungicide effects not entirely linked to control of visible ability of the crop to resist or avoid infection – 'field resistance'.
disease, eg canopy ‘greening’ or growth regulatory effects disease inoculum varieties + + Disease resistance weather and region crop management Some varieties are highly resistant to disease and may not Disease pressure Field resistance require fungicide treatment if disease pressure is low. Even under high disease pressure a moderate fungicide input may be sufficient. Other varieties are very susceptible, requiring high fungicide input to reach their yield potential.
It is important to take disease resistance into account before deciding on an appropriate fungicide dose.
Disease inoculum Disease lesions on lower leaves are the most common source of infection of upper leaves emerging during stem extension. Crops should be inspected regularly. If even a small amount of disease is visible on lower leaves, the potential risk is high. Whether disease develops subsequently on upper leaves depends on varietal resistance, crop management and weather.
Crop management High nitrogen uptake encourages rapid development of rusts and powdery mildew. In such crops even moderately resistant Choice of a more disease-resistant variety can significantly varieties can suffer high levels of disease. reduce the total fungicide input needed.
Early drilling (early September) puts crops at higher risk to most diseases and moderately resistant varieties can suffer Types of resistance high levels of disease. Race non-specific resistance is effective against all fungal races and is not subject to sudden failure. Therefore, the Septoria Septoria Brown Yellow Powdery Recommended List ratings provide a guide to the relative tritici nodorum rust rust mildew (in spring) resistance of this type of variety that is unlikely to change Early sown * quickly.Although control is not complete, it can be as effective as fungicides. This is the main type of resistance High N/ available against septoria tritici.
dense crop Race-specific resistance can provide complete protection (RL Min-till, after rating 9) against rusts or powdery mildew. But new ‘races’ of wheat the fungus may develop which can overcome this form of Increased risk Small increase in risk Decreased risk resistance, leading to sudden loss of control.
*mildew tends to proliferate in spring on late-sown crops Race-specific resistance to rusts and powdery mildew will no Varieties longer be effective if a virulent race of the fungus emerges.
HGCA Recommended List trials assess disease susceptibility When such a change occurs, the level of varietal susceptibility and yield across the UK, helping growers select varieties with then depends on its underlying race non-specific resistance.
resistance to diseases prevalent in specific regions. Robust New races of brown rust and yellow rust were detected in fungicide programmes are used in RL trials to maximise 2011 – all varieties should be monitored closely in the 2012 varietal potential. Comparing treated and untreated yields season, particularly in regions with a high risk of infection.
provides an indication of total yield response to fungicides.
Varieties with larger differences between treated and untreated yields will usually need higher fungicide inputs to achieve their yield potential.
23 1500 1300 1100 900 700 500 1 2 3 Total triazole dose in a programme tsoc edicignuf revo nigraM ah/£ Resistant variety Susceptible variety 1 1500 1300 1100 900 700 500 1 2 3 Total triazole dose in a programme tsoc edicignuf revo nigraM ah/£ Resistant variety Susceptible variety


---
Active ingredients for wheat disease control 25 Updated annually, see w.hgca.com/diseasecontrol



| No. Active ingredient   | Example products –single ai                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Example products – more than one ai                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|:------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                         | Amistar                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Amistar Opti, Priori Xtra                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 2 bixafen               | only available in mixtures                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Aviator 235 Xpro, Boogie Xpro, Skyway 285 Xpro, Sparticus Xpro, Variano Xpro                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | only available in mixtures                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Tracker, Venture, Nebula, Enterprise                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 4 carbendazim           | Delsene 50 Flo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Contrast, Harvesan, Punch C                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Bravo 500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Alto Elite, Amistar Opti, Cherokee, Credo, Guru, Midas, Pentangle, Prairie, Prospa, Zimbrail                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 6 cyflufenamid          | Cyflamid                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | –                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Centaur                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Alto Elite, Cherokee, Furlong, Menara, Priori Xtra, Radius, Sphere                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 8 cyprodinil            | Unix                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Acanto Prima, Radius                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Plover                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 10 dimoxystrobin        | only available in mixtures                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Swing Gold                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Opus, Epic, Ignite                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Adexar, Brutus, Capalo, Ceando, Diamant, Eclipse, Ennobe, Envoy, Enterprise, Gemstone, Icarus, Mantra, Nebula, Opera, Opus Team, Seguris, Swing Gold, Tracker, Venture |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 12 famoxadone           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Charisma, Medley                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Tern                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Eros                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 14 fenpropimorph        | Corbel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Capalo, Colstar, Diamant, Eclipse, Ensign, Jenton, Mantra, Opus Team, Orka, Pluton                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | only available in mixtures                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Fandango, Firefly 155, Jaunt, Variano Xpro                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 16 fluquinconazole      | Flamenco                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Foil                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Lyric, Sanction 25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Charisma, Colstar, Contrast, Harvesan, Medley, Midas, Pluton, Punch C                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 18 flutriafol           | Consul, Pointer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Prospa                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Imtrex                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Adexar                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 20 isopyrazam           | only available in mixtures                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Seguris                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | only available in mixtures                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Ensign, Mantra                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 22 mancozeb             | Quell Flo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Guru                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Caramba, Sunorg Pro                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Brutus, Icarus                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 24 metrafenone          | Attenzo, Flexity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Capalo, Ceando                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Galileo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Acanto Prima, Credo, Furlong, Zimbrail                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 26 prochloraz           | Poraz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Agate, Bumper P, Ennobe, Foil, Vareon                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Anode                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Bumper P, Cherokee, Cogito, Menara, Prairie                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 28 proquinazid          | Justice, Talius                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Vareon                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Proline 275                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Aviator 235 Xpro, Boogie Xpro, Cello, Fandango, Firefly 155, Helix, Jaunt, Kestrel, Mobius, Prosaro, Sparticus Xpro, Skyway 285 Xpro, Variano Xpro, Zephyr             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 30 pyraclostrobin       | Comet 200, Vivid                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Diamant, Envoy, Gemstone, Jenton, Nebula, Opera                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Apres, Fortress                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Orka                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 32 spiroxamine          | Torch Extra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Boogie Xpro, Cello, Helix, Sage                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Folicur                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Agate, Cello, Cogito, Eros, Kestrel, Pentangle, Prosaro, Sage, Silvacur, Skyway 285 Xpro, Sparticus Xpro, Veto F                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 34 thiophanate-methyl   | Cercobin, Topsin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | -                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | only available in mixtures                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Silvacur, Veto F                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 36 trifloxystrobin      | Swift SC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Jaunt, Mobius, Sphere, Zephyr                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|                         | Product No.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Product No.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                        | Product No.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Product No.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|                         | Cogito 27, 33 Colstar 14, 17 Comet 200 30 Consul 18 Contrast 4, 17 Corbel 14 Credo 5, 25 Cyflamid 6 Delsene 50 Flo 4 Diamant 11, 14, 30 Eclipse 11, 14 Ennobe 11, 26 Ensign 14, 21 Enterprise 3, 11 Envoy 11, 30 Epic 11 Eros 13, 33 Fandango 15, 29 Firefly 155 15, 29 Flamenco 16 Flexity 24 Foil 16, 26 | Folicur 33 Fortress 31 Furlong 7, 25 Galileo 25 Gemstone 11, 30 Guru 5, 22 Harvesan 4, 18 Helix 29, 32 Icarus 11, 23 Ignite 11 Imtrex 19 Jaunt 15, 29, 36 Jenton 14, 30 Justice 28 Kestrel 29, 33 Lyric 17 Mantra 11, 14, 21 Medley 12, 17 Menara 7, 27 Midas 5, 17 Mobius 29, 36 Nebula 3, 11, 30 |                                                                                                                                                                        | Opera 11, 30 Opus 11 Opus Team 11, 14 Orka 14, 31 Pentangle 5, 33 Plover 9 Pluton 14, 17 Pointer 18 Poraz 26 Prairie 5, 27 Priori Xtra 1, 7 Proline 275 29 Prosaro 29, 33 Prospa 5, 18 Punch C 4, 17 Quell Flo 22 Radius 7, 8 Sage 32, 33 Sanction 25 17 Seguris 11, 20 Silvacur 33, 35 Skyway 285 Xpro 2, 29, 33 | Sparticus Xpro 2, 29, 33 Sphere 7, 36 Sunorg Pro 23 Swift SC 36 Swing Gold 10, 11 Talius 28 Tern 13 Topsin 34 Torch Extra 32 Tracker 3, 11 Unix 8 Vareon 26, 28 Variano Xpro 2, 15, 29 Venture 3, 11 Veto F 33, 35 Vivid 30 Zephyr 29, 36 Zimbrail 5, 25 |


---
Resistance management New fungicides and resistance Succinate Dehydrogenase Inhibitors (SDHIs) management Since 2010, a number of new SDHIs have been approved for use on wheat: bixafen (in Aviator Xpro and other products), Resistance isopyrazam (in Seguris) and fluxapyroxad (in Adexar). SDHIs It can arise rapidly so that control is lost in a single step or inhibit a different enzyme in the mitochondria of fungi to develop gradually. In this case, the pathogen population azoles. These new generation SDHIs have excellent efficacy becomes progressively less sensitive and field performance on septoria tritici and a broad spectrum of foliar disease may initially only be affected under very high disease pressure control. They are at medium/high risk of fungicide resistance and with susceptible varieties. so should always be used in mixtures (see below).
Septoria tritici Reducing resistance risk: the role of mixtures Sensitivity to triazoles has declined slowly since the mid-90s Azole and SDHI-based fungicides, are at risk of resistance but efficacy of epoxiconazole and prothioconazole remains development. These fungicides should be used in a way good at full label doses. Azole resistance is due to various which slows resistance, to avoid future loss of efficacy.
mutations and their frequency has changed quite rapidly in Using mixtures of fungicides with different modes of action recent years. Resistance is widespread to both MBC and good efficacy, is key to reducing resistance risk and fungicides and strobilurin fungicides.
achieving good control.
Yellow and brown rust For this reason, SDHI fungicides are only available in mixtures Although shifts in sensitivity to triazoles were reported in the with fungicides of a different mode of action. Azole fungicides 1990s, field performance has been maintained. No resistance are available as single active substance products, but should has been found to morpholine or strobilurin fungicides. not be used alone.
Powdery mildew For the major diseases, basing the programme on azole + SDHI mixtures should provide some mutual protection from With rapid growth and many disease cycles each season, the risk of resistance development against both the there is an inherently high resistance risk. High levels of components.
resistance to strobilurins in mildew mean these fungicides are ineffective. After an initial shift, the sensitivity to morpholines For septoria tritici control, in most circumstances, adding and triazoles has stabilised and they still provide partial control. chlorothalonil to azole or azole + SDHI mixtures aids efficacy, Quinoxyfen-resistant isolates are now widespread in the UK. reduces the risk of resistance development, and should In 2009 and 2010, low levels of isolates resistant to prolong their usefulness. However, if T2 sprays are delayed, metrafenone were detected in parts of Europe. the addition of chlorothalonil may slightly reduce triazole or SDHI / triazole eradicant activity. Therefore, where infections Septoria nodorum are already established and full eradicant activity is needed, Strobilurin resistance has been reported in mainland Europe chlorothalonil should be omitted.
and may be affecting fungicide performance in the UK.
For rust control, adding a strobilurin fungicide to an azole or Eyespot azole + SDHI mixture may improve control and reduce the Reduced sensitivity to prochloraz and cyprodinil has been risk of resistance development. Only two strobilurin sprays known in parts of Europe for several years. There is no can be applied in any season.
evidence of any sensitivity shift to cyprodinil in the UK. Some triazoles and boscalid achieve good control.
Good resistance management is based on limiting the level of exposure of the target pathogen to the fungicide – Fungicide input is only one aspect of crop management and other control measures should always be used, such as good hygiene through disposal of crop debris and control of volunteers which may harbour disease – Always aim to select varieties exhibiting a high degree of resistance to diseases known to be prevalent in your area, in addition to the main agronomic factors you desire – Avoid growing large areas of any one variety, particularly in areas of high disease risk where the variety is known to be susceptible – Only use fungicides in situations where the risk or presence of disease warrants treatment – Use a dose that will give effective disease control and which is appropriate for the cultivar and disease pressure – Make full use of effective fungicides with different modes of action in mixtures or as alternative sprays – Ensure that mixing partners are used at doses that give similar efficacy and persistence – Monitor crops regularly for disease and treat before the infection becomes well established – Avoid repeated applications of the same product or mode of action and never exceed the maximum recommended number of applications For more information on resistance management, see the Fungicide Resistance Action Group - UK (http://w.pesticides.gov.uk/guidance/industries/pesticides/advisory-groups/Resistance-Action-Groups/frag) 26 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012


---
27 )%( esaesiD 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 Appropriate dose 15 10 5 0 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.00 Fungicide dose )%( esaesiD 50 45 40 35 30 25 Appropriate 20 dose 15 10 5 0 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.00 Fungicide dose Foliar diseases – Fungicide dose Determining appropriate dose However, crop tolerance to disease (ie yield loss froma given Fungicides are rigorously tested in HGCA-funded trials. Each level of disease) and fungicide effectiveness alsomodify the year, a single spray is applied at a range of doses on varieties appropriate dose.
which are highly susceptible to each major disease, and at To help select an appropriate dose, see the HGCA website:
sites where disease pressure is high. Disease levels are w.hgca.com/diseasecontrol observed a few weeks’ later.
Performance of individual active ingredients can be assessed by comparing dose-response curves. These show average performance measured across a range of sites, seasons and leaf layers.
Disease severity in untreated crops depends on local disease pressure and varietal resistance. In treated crops, severity also depends on fungicide dose applied.
Fungicide dose and margin Fungicide spray cost increases with dose applied, while yield loss, to some degree, is proportional to the amount of disease present. The figure below plots fungicide dose against margin and identifies when the return from a higher dose would not be economically justified.
The appropriate dose depends on disease risk and predicted yield loss and is defined as that point where margin is maximised.
Below the appropriate dose, profit is seriously reduced by ineffective disease control.
Maximising profit may mean accepting a small amount of disease in the crop despite treatment.
How disease and variety affect dose Differing disease pressure is a major reason for varying appropriate doses between different crops. Clearly, higher disease pressure and disease susceptibility justify higher inputs.
)%( esaesiD 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 Untreated 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.00 Fungicide dose (1 = label recommended dose) )%( esaesiD )ah/£( tsoc edicignuf revo nigraM Moderately resistant variety under moderate disease pressure The dose-response curve Susceptible variety under high disease pressure 50 45 40 35 Margin over 30 fungicide cost 25 20 Appropriate 1500 15 dose 1300 10 5 1100 0 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.00 900 Fungicide dose 700 500 1 2 3 Total triazole dose in a programme tsoc edicignuf revo nigraM ah/£ £160/t £120/t £80/t 1500 1300 1100 900 700 500 1 2 3 Total triazole dose in a programme tsoc edicignuf revo nigraM ah/£ £160/t £120/t £80/t Fungicide dose and wheat price The optimum fungicide dose changes little with wheat price.
As the graph above illustrates, if wheat price increases from £80 to £160/tonne then the optimum triazole dose increases by 20%.
Actual dose required varies less with grain price than with disease pressure and variety resistance. Under moderate disease pressure the optimum dose of triazole for a diseasesusceptible variety is more than that required for the more disease-resistant one.


---
% icitirt airotpeS 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1.
Dose % icitirt airotpeS 15 10 5 0 Fungicide performance curves Protection v eradication ‘Eradication’ curves indicate fungicidal activity against septoria tritici after infection has occurred, but before ‘Protection’ curves show the activity of fungicides when symptoms become visible.
they are applied soon after the emergence of a leaf layer before much infection has occurred. Performance of products on each leaf layer, and at each site, was classified as protectant or eradicant based on timing of leaf emergence relative to spray application.
Septoria tritici Septoria tritici Protection Eradication 20 1. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1.
Dose (1.0 = label recommended dose) 2009-2011 aggregate data 2009-2011 aggregate data * Opus has been suceeded by Ignite in trials but performance is similar 28 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012 Updated annually, see w.hgca.com/diseasecontrol 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1.
Adexar Aviator Xpro Brutus Opus* Proline Seguris


---
% tsuR wolleY 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1.
Dose % wedliM 28 21 14 7 0 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Dose % tsur nworB Yellow rust Brown rust 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.2 0.4 1.
Dose 2011 data 2009 data (no disease in trials in 2010 or 2011) Mildew 2006-2009 data 29 Updated annually, see w.hgca.com/diseasecontrol 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1. 0.2 0.4 1.
Adexar Aviator Xpro Brutus Comet Cyflamid FireFly Flexity Ignite Opus Proline Seguris Talius Tern (1.0 = label recommended dose)


---
Decision guide – T0, T1, T2 and T3 Spray timing T0 T1 Leaf 3 emerged T2 Flag leaf emerged T3 Ear spray 30 HGCA Wheat disease management guide 2012



| Rationale                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Product choice and dose                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Treatment combined with PGR before T1 may be appropriate in high disease years on susceptible varieties. Any yellow rust found should be controlled immediately. Controlling brown rust, mildew and eyespot may be economic where disease risk is high and on susceptible varieties. Treatment may slow early rust epidemic development and reduce disease pressure at T1 and T2. Check crops in early spring for yellow rust, brown rust, mildew and eyespot. Low doses – quarter to half label recommended dose – are appropriate. Timing for eyespot and brown rust control – 2–3 weeks before T1 applications. For septoria tritici control, sprays are largely for insurance. Chlorothalonil applied three weeks before T1 applications would be adequate.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Rusts– triazoles, strobilurins Mildew – cyflufenamid, fenpropidin, metrafenone, proquinazid, quinoxyfen, spiroxamine Eyespot –boscalid + epoxiconazole, cyprodinil, flusilazole, metrafenone, prochloraz, prothioconazole Septoria tritici – chlorothalonil                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Primarily aimed at controlling septoria tritici on recently- emerged final leaf 3 and sometimes diseases on leaf 4. Varieties susceptible to septoria tritici (rated 5 or less on the HGCA Recommended List) should be targeted as high priority. Check growth stage and leaf emergence carefully at this time. Spraying too early or too late will give poorer disease control. Sprays applied for septoria triticiwill normally also control rusts. Eyespot risk should be assessed. Strobilurins add to disease control and increase yield due to greening effects.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Base spray on a triazole/chlorothalonil mixture, possibly with the addition of SDHIs. Use doses between half and three-quarters of label recommended dose to ensure eradicant control ofseptoria tritici. The triazole choice and dose is particularly important. Septoria tritici – chlorothalonil, triazoles, SDHIs Rusts – morpholines, spiroxamine, strobilurins, triazoles, SDHIs Mildew – cyflufenamid, cyprodinil, fenpropidin, metrafenone, morpholines, proquinazid, quinoxyfen, spiroxamine, SDHIs Eyespot –boscalid + epoxiconazole, cyprodinil, flusilazole, metrafenone, prochloraz, prothioconazole                                                                                                                                                                  |
| This is the most important spray as yield responses to flag leaf sprays are consistently profitable. This spray is aimed at controlling disease on the top two leaves, which contribute approximately 65% of yield. Apply when most flag leaves on main tillers have emerged. Varieties prone to septoria tritici (rated 5 or less on the HGCA Recommended List) should be targeted for treatment first as delaying flag leaf sprays will be costly. Spray timing is less critical on more resistant varieties.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Doses between half and full label recommended dose are usually appropriate. Higher triazole doses are needed on septoria tritici susceptible varieties under high disease pressure. Lower doses are appropriate on disease-resistant varieties under low disease pressure. Use triazole/SDHI mixture to ensure good eradicant control of septoria tritici and prolong green leaf area of the top two leaves. Add chlorothalonil on septoria tritici susceptible varieties in protectant situations. Septoria tritici – chlorothalonil, triazoles, SDHIs Rusts – morpholines, spiroxamine, strobilurins, triazoles, SDHIs Mildew – cyflufenamid, fenpropidin, metrafenone, morpholines, proquinazid, quinoxyfen, spiroxamine, SDHIs                                                 |
| The ‘ear’ spray targets ear diseases, but also gives additional control of disease on the top two leaves – important in high disease seasons and on disease-prone varieties. On septoria tritici susceptible varieties, ensure triazole applied for ear diseases is also active against septoria tritici. In disease-resistant varieties, an ear spray may not be necessary. Brown rust, yellow rust and septoria nodorum can be damaging if ears are affected. Wet weather during flowering can lead to fusarium ear blight and possibly mycotoxins and discoloured grain. Control of ear blight is difficult and costly as high doses must be applied close to the infection period. Avoiding mycotoxins is more important for wheat intended for human consumption. Growers should use the HGCA fusarium risk assessment tool and treat accordingly. Sooty moulds, which result in discoloured grain, have little effect on yield but can be important in milling varieties. | Choose a triazole-based product or mixture with specific activity against ear diseases. This also provides broad- spectrum eradicant control on upper leaves. Consider adding a strobilurin where grain filling is likely to be prolonged or where brown rust is a risk. A quarter to a half label dose is appropriate for additional disease control. A minimum of half dose is necessary for fusarium control. Preferred active ingredients specifically for ear disease control: Septoria nodorum – azoxystrobin, dimoxystrobin, epoxiconazole, prothioconazole, pyraclostrobin, trifloxystrobin. Fusarium ear blight – epoxiconazole plus dimoxystrobin, metconazole, prothioconazole, tebuconazole. Sooty moulds – azoxystrobin, dimoxystrobin, pyraclostrobin, tebuconazole. |


---
Further information HGCA publications and details of HGCA-funded Current projects projects are all available on the HGCA website – 3187 United Kingdom Cereal Pathogen Virulence Survey (UKCPVS) w.hgca.com 3453 Integrated strategy to prevent mycotoxin risks 3479 Study of Fusarium langsethiae infection of cereals HGCA Guides 3517 Improved tools to rationalise and support stewardship HGCA Recommended Lists for cereals and oilseeds, programmes for SDHI fungicides to control cereal HGCA (annual) diseases in the UK G34 Guidelines to minimise the risk of fusarium 3570 Cephalosporium leaf stripe – an emerging threat to mycotoxins in cereals, HGCA (2010) wheat crops in short rotations P05 Nozzle selection chart, HGCA (2010) 3573 Improved modelling of fusarium to aid mycotoxin G41 The encyclopaedia of cereal diseases, prediction in UK wheat HGCA/BASF (2008) 3625 Identification, prevalence and impacts of viral diseases G39 The wheat growth guide, HGCA (2008) in UK winter wheat crops (PhD) G31 Take-all in winter wheat – management guidelines, 3670 Screening for costs of disease resistance caused by HGCA (2006) stomatal dysfunction G14 Pest management in cereals and oilseeds, 3713 Identification and characterisation of azole sensitivity HGCA (2003) shifts in Irish and UK populations of Mycosphaerella graminicola sampled from HGCA fungicide performance G53 The barley disease management guide, HGCA (2012) winter wheat trials (latest version available at w.hgca.com/publications) 3729 Development of novel methods for detecting and HGCA Topic Sheets, Information quantifying viable inoculums of Oculimacula yallundae Sheets and Project Progress and O. acuformis (PhD) 3730 Value of resistance genes for controlling septoria tritici TS113 Septoria tritici in winter wheat, HGCA (2012) in high-yielding wheat varieties (PhD) TS112 Wheat yellow rust management, HGCA (2012) 3734 New fungicide performance in winter wheat TS111 Managing eyespot in winter wheat, HGCA (2012) TS108 HGCA risk assessment for fusarium mycotoxins Websites in wheat, HGCA (2011) Information on the efficacy of individual products will be updated TS96 Options for low volume spraying of winter wheat, annually with a range of online resources. Always consult the HGCA HGCA (2007) website for the latest versions.
TS56 Managing ergot in crops, HGCA (2002) HGCA – w.hgca.com – Fungicide performance tool (w.hgca.com/diseasecontrol) HGCA Project Reports – Fusarium mycotoxin risk assessment (w.hgca.com/mycotoxins) PR477 Improving risk assessment to minimise fusarium – RL Plus (w.hgca.com/varieties/rl-plus) mycotoxins in harvested wheat grain (2011) – The Encyclopaedia of Cereal Diseases (w.hgca.com/cde) PR475 Understanding evolution and selection of azole – The UK Cereal Pathogen Virulence Survey resistance mechanisms in UK populations of Mycosphaerella graminicola (2011) Other websites PR462 EURO-wheat: A European collaboration on resistance British Society of Plant Breeders – w.bspb.co.uk characteristics of wheat cultivars, wheat pathogen Chemicals Regulation Directorate – w.pesticides.gov.uk virulence, disease management tools and fungicide CropMonitor – w.cropmonitor.co.uk efficacy (2011) Crop Protection Association – w.cropprotection.org.uk PR459 Monitoring risks of mycotoxin contamination caused by fusarium head blight pathogens in winter wheat (2009) Food Standards Agency – w.food.gov.uk PR456 Towards a sustainable whole-farm approach to the Liaison – https://secure.fera.defra.gov.uk/liaison control of ergot (2009) Fungicide Resistance Action Committee (FRAC) – w.frac.info PR445 Assessing take-all risk in second wheats using the Fungicide Resistance Action Group (FRAG-UK) – Predicta B test (2008) w.pesticides.gov.uk/guidance/industries/pesticides/advisory -groups/Resistance-Action-Groups/frag PR444 Appropriate Doses Network: up-to-date information on fungicide performance for wheat growers (2008) NIAB TAG – w.niab.com PR439 Fungicide doses in sequences and mixtures for winter SAC – w.sac.ac.uk/crops wheat (2008) Science and Advice for Scottish Agriculture – w.sasa.gov.uk PR432 Understanding the basis of resistance to fusarium The Voluntary Initiative – w.voluntaryinitiative.org.uk head blight in UK winter wheat (2008) 31


---
HGCA Stoneleigh Park HGCA Publications Warwickshire CV8 2TL T 0845 245 0009 w.hgca.com E hgca@cambertown.com Acknowledgements This guide, funded by HGCA as a knowledge transfer project, This edition was revised by Dr Simon Oxley, Dr Paul Gosling is based on research funded by HGCA and Defra. It was and Richard Williams, HGCA.
written by Dr Neil Paveley, Jonathan Blake and Dr Peter Gladders, ADAS; and Dr Valerie Cockerell, Scottish Agricultural HGCA is grateful to many people who have commented on Science Agency. draft versions of this edition, including: Dr Susannah Bolton, Dr Vicky Foster, Caroline Nicholls and Anna Farrell, HGCA; The first edition of this guide was edited by Dr Clive Edwards, Dr Valerie Cockerell, Scottish Agricultural Science Agency; HGCA and Geoff Dodgson, Chamberlain. HGCA is grateful to Jonathan Blake, ADAS; as well as David Houghton, John many people who commented on draft versions of previous Humphreys, Keith Norman and David Robinson.
editions, including: Dr Denise Ginsberg, ADAS; Dr Peter Mercer and Dr Louise Cooke, AFBI; Steve Waterhouse, BASF; This edition was edited by Dr Emily Boys, HGCA.
Nigel Adam and Nigel Godley, Bayer CropScience; Bill Clark, Broom’s Barn; Dr Penny Maplestone, BSPB; Malcolm Design by Pinstone Communications Ltd.
Tomkins, Chemtura Europe Ltd; Reuben Morris, Cropwise; David Roberts, Dow AgroSciences; Patrick Goldsworthy, Goldsworthy Associates; Dr Simon Edwards, Harper Adams University College; Steven Burgner, Dr Victoria Foster, Prof. Graham Jellis, Dr Clare Kelly and Dr Jim McVittie, HGCA; David Stormonth, Interfarm; Dr Rosemary Bayles and Dr Kerry Maguire, NIAB; Dr Oliver Macdonald, PSD; Dr Simon Oxley, SAC; Huw Phillips, Scottish Agronomy; David Ranner, Syngenta; Mark Taplin, independent agronomist; and David Houghton and Julian Hasler, farmers.
Photographs courtesy of ADAS, Dalton Seeds, SAC and SASA.
Disclaimer While the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board, operating through its HGCA division, seeks to ensure that the information contained within this document is accurate at the time of printing, no warranty is given in respect thereof and, to the maximum extent permitted by law, the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board accepts no liability for loss, damage or injury howsoever caused (including that caused by negligence) or suffered directly or indirectly in relation to information and opinions contained in or omitted from this document.
Reference herein to trade names and proprietary products without stating that they are protected does not imply that they may be regarded as unprotected and thus free for general use. No endorsement of named products is intended, nor is any criticism implied of other alternative, but unnamed products.
HGCA is the cereals and oilseeds division of the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board.
Spring 2012 Electronic version can be downloaded at w.hgca.com © Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board 2012 All rights reserved HGCA guide 54 (G54)


---
