# NutManGuideRB209S1_230526_WEB.pdf

Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) Section 1 Principles of nutrient management and fertiliser use Updated June 2023


---
Contents 19 Assessing the soil nitrogen supply (SNS) 34 Fertiliser types and quality Mineral residues after harvest The total concentration and the ratio Winter cover crops of nutrients in the fertiliser 3 Using the Nutrient Management Effect of excess winter rainfall Physical nature, quality and suitability Guide (RB209) Nitrogen released from mineralisation of fertiliser 4 The basis of good practice of organic matter The cost of the nutrients Soil nitrogen supply (SNS) Index system Nitrogen fertilisers 5 Good nutrient management Nitrogen uptake efficiency by crops Phosphate fertilisers The growing challenges Timing of nitrogen applications Potash and magnesium fertilisers Greenhouse gases The effect of economic changes Sulphur fertilisers Water quality Alternative approaches to nitrogen decisions Soils 36 Fertiliser application Air quality 24 Phosphate, potash and magnesium 37 Other sources of useful information for field crops 8 Crop nutrient requirements Statutory Instruments Managing soil phosphate, potash 9 Integrated plant nutrient management and magnesium supply 38 Analysis of fertilisers and liming materials Soil sampling and analysis 9 Important soil properties Crop analysis 39 Glossary Soil texture Potash-releasing clay soils Assessment of soil texture Target Soil Indices Soil structure Soil organic matter 30 Magnesium Soil mineral matter 30 Sulphur Stone content and rooting depth Sulphur deficiency 12 Soil acidity and liming Diagnostic methods Lime recommendations 32 Sodium Liming materials 32 Micronutrients (trace elements) Lime application Deficiencies affecting crop growth 16 Nitrogen for field crops Deficiencies affecting livestock performance Crop nitrogen requirement Basis of the recommendations Nitrogen supply Nitrogen losses Factors influencing decisions about nitrogen use 2


---
Using the Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) The Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) supports our farmers, growers, and their trusted advisers to make the most of organic materials and balance the benefits of fertiliser use against the costs – both economic and environmental.
The Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) is funded and supported by the The guide outlines the value of nutrients and soil and explains how good Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board in conjunction with a range nutrient management can save money and infer improved environmental of industry and academic partners. AHDB first published the Nutrient outcomes. The guide aims to increase uptake and accuracy of crop nutrient Management Guide (RB209) in May 2017, after taking over secretariat and management planning.
governance for revisions from Defra in November 2014. Since its publication, recommendations have been revised with the latest independent research funded by AHDB and its partners. A list of updates is available at Disclaimer ahdb.org.uk/rb209 Whilst the RB209 guidance may help to inform assessments of To improve the accessibility and relevance of the recommendations and pollution prevention and control under national regulations, the Nutrient information, the Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) is published as seven Management Guide (RB209) was not directly developed, nor peer reviewed sections that are updated individually:
for this purpose. It should not be relied upon as the sole source of nutrient • Section 1: Principles of nutrient management and fertiliser use management guidance for informing environmental assessments.
• Section 2: Organic materials AHDB and its partners shall not be held liable for any misuse of the • Section 3: Grass and forage crops Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) by anyone. All users are responsible for their application of the information within the guide.
• Section 4: Arable crops • Section 5: Potatoes (content last updated 2021) • Section 6: Vegetables and bulbs (content last updated 2021) Always consider your local conditions and consult a FACTS Qualified • Section 7: Fruit, vines and hops (content last updated 2017) Adviser if necessary.
Further information The Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) will be updated regularly.
Please email your contact details to comms@ahdb.org.uk so that we can send you notifications of when they are published.
Using the Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) 3


---
The basis of good practice Decisions on the rate, method and timing of fertiliser application for individual crops:
Practices that make the best economic use of nutrients also help protect • Apply nitrogen when there is greatest demand for it the wider environment.
• Consider placement of fertilisers for responsive crops Obtain relevant information:
Careful selection of fertilisers:
• Soil type • Consider the cost-effectiveness of alternative fertiliser materials • Field cropping, fertilising and manuring history every 3–5 years • Take account of the nutrient percentage and the availability of nutrients • Regular soil analysis for pH, P, K and Mg for crop uptake • Nutrient balances – surplus or deficit from applications to previous crops • Make sure that the physical quality of the fertiliser will allow accurate spreading • An assessment of soil nitrogen supply every spring before applying Accurate application of fertilisers and manures:
nitrogen fertiliser • Winter rainfall • Regularly maintain and calibrate fertiliser spreaders and sprayers • Regularly check and maintain manure spreaders • Crop tissue analysis where appropriate Record-keeping:
Assess crop yield potential, economics and markets:
• Keep accurate field records to help with decisions on fertiliser use • Take account of fertiliser nitrogen and crop produce prices • Consider market requirements for quality and quantity of harvested produce Points to consider • Adjust phosphate and potash for expected crop yield (including straw where removal is planned) • Statutory rules that affect nutrient use apply in all parts of the UK.
Nitrate Vulnerable Zone (NVZ) rules apply in England and Scotland, Assessment of available nutrients from organic materials:
and there are similar rules in Wales • Apply manures in spring if possible and incorporate rapidly into the soil • Also in England, Farming Rules for Water cover nutrient use generally following surface application to tillage land or use of trailing hose, trailing but particularly the use of nitrogen and phosphate shoe or injection equipment for slurry • Make use of manure analysis (on-farm and laboratory testing) or use • In Northern Ireland, Nutrient Action Programme (NAP) rules affect both nitrogen and phosphate use of standard values (Section 2: Organic materials) • Calculate available nutrients based on manure type, method and • All relevant rules should be consulted at an early stage in nutrient time of application management planning to ensure compliance. There can be closed periods and limitations on the amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus applied in manufactured fertilisers and organic manures 4


---
Good nutrient management Greenhouse gases At present, agriculture is estimated to contribute around 9% of total UK Maintaining a profitable farming business requires continued development greenhouse gas emissions. An estimated 70% of the UK’s nitrous oxide and use of a wide range of skills by farmers and their advisers. Good nutrient emissions – a greenhouse gas around 300 times more potent than carbon management is an important aspect of this and can contribute both to the dioxide – comes from agriculture. Soil nitrous oxide emissions come from efficiency of the farming business and to reducing environmental impacts. three on-farm sources: grazing returns, storage and application of organic manures and nitrogen fertiliser.
AHDB’s Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) provides information to help operate a profitable farm business while protecting the environment. Careful planning, paying particular attention to soil pH that maximises the efficiency of fertiliser use and better management of manures, can help This guide helps farmers and advisers to make the most of organic materials reduce the amount of nitrogen that is lost as nitrous oxide. The farming and balance the benefits of fertiliser use against the costs – both economic industry has published its Greenhouse Gas Action Plan, which confirms and environmental. It explains the value of nutrients and soil, and why good its intent to play its part in helping to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
nutrient management is about more than just the fertilisers you buy. Nutrient management can save you money as well as help protect the environment.
To help your forward planning, the guide also outlines possible future changes Further information that could further affect fertiliser use.
Greenhouse Gas Action Plan The growing challenges ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/greenhouse-gas-action-plan-ghgap The agricultural sector faces a number of challenges, including Protecting our Water, Soil and Air: A Code of Good Agricultural Practice producing more food to feed a growing population while impacting less on for farmers, growers and land managers the environment. Agricultural production relies on environmental resources, gov.uk/government/publications/protecting-our-water-soil-and-air such as soil, water and air, and is vulnerable to climate change, including Carbon footprint calculators flood and drought. Good nutrient management using a balanced long-term ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/carbon-footprint-calculators-what-toapproach is part of a sustainable agricultural system that is resilient to ask-to-help-you-choose climate and economic change.
Sources of inorganic nutrients are limited, and manufacture of fertilisers requires energy, so recycling of nutrients through organic materials and improving nutrient availability from well-structured, biologically active soils makes better use of resources and economic sense.
Ensuring the carefully managed application of all nutrients, including manufactured fertilisers and organic materials, helps to close the ‘nutrient gap’ that arises when the crop is removed at harvest. Optimising nutrient uptake by crops helps minimise an excess in the soil where, for example, nitrogen can be lost as nitrous oxide or ammonia to the air or nitrate to water.
Demand for land to grow non-food crops, such as biomass crops, and from non-farming uses may well increase. This is one factor which may mean that higher crop yields will be necessary to supply the increased demand for food.
Good nutrient management 5


---
Water quality Soils Farming is one of many influences on water quality and water-dependent Incorporating organic materials (e.g. composts, manure and biosolids) plays ecosystems. The main agricultural pollutants are nutrients (phosphates and an important role in increasing levels of organic matter in soil. It can have nitrates), pesticides and other agrochemicals, faecal bacteria and sediment. important agricultural and ecological benefits, such as reducing fertiliser Losses from the application of manufactured fertilisers and spreading of requirements, improving soil condition and biological activity, and diverting organic manures contribute to diffuse water pollution. materials from landfill.
In England and Wales, around 60% of nitrates and 25% of phosphates in Certain materials spread on land can also contain low concentrations of our waters originate from agricultural land. Elevated levels of these nutrients pollutants, especially heavy metals, which, following repeated applications, can harm the aquatic environment and have an impact on biodiversity. In can accumulate in the soil. This could pose a risk to human health and the addition, excessive amounts of agricultural pollutants, including nitrates and environment. Remediating soils which contain pollutants is difficult and phosphates, have to be removed before water can be supplied to consumers. costly, so it is important to prevent unacceptable levels of pollutants getting into the soil.
The Water Framework Directive requires our rivers, lakes, ground and coastal waters to reach or maintain good ecological and chemical status. Therefore, it is important that agricultural land is managed carefully to avoid losses of Further information soil, nutrients and faecal bacteria.
AHDB Field drainage guide Key measures to reduce the risk of phosphate movement to water include:
ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/field-drainage-guide • Avoiding build-up or maintenance above the target Index Think soils • Following the recommendations in this guide to maintain the target level ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/thinksoils of crop-available soil phosphate, taking full account of the phosphate AHDB Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) Section 2: Organic materials contentof organic materials applied (Section 2: Organic materials) ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/rb209-section-2-organic-materials • Minimising the risk of soil erosion • Avoiding surface applications of inorganic fertilisers and organic manures (solid or liquid) when soils are snow-covered, frozen hard, waterlogged, deeply cracked, or on steeply sloping ground adjacent to watercourses • Applying inorganic fertiliser in small amounts as annual dressings, rather than as a single, large dressing. Large applications of both organic materials and inorganic fertilisers aimed at increasing the Soil Index should be thoroughly mixed in the soil 6


---
Air quality Further information Agricultural activities account for around 90% of ammonia emissions.
High concentrations of ammonia in the air can mean that nitrogen is Low emissions – focus on ammonia deposited from the air onto the land. This can damage some habitats by ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/low-emissions-focus-on-ammonia changing the species of plants present and pollute streams, rivers and other Code of Good Agricultural Practice for reducing ammonia emissions water bodies. The ammonia can also be converted to nitrous oxide, a potent gov.uk/government/publications/code-of-good-agricultural-practicegreenhouse gas, and released from soils. Ammonia also combines with other for-reducing-ammonia-emissions substances in the air to form fine particles, which can harm human health.
Code of Good Agricultural Practice guidance on reducing ammonia There are strong pressures to reduce ammonia emissions from agriculture.
losses from agriculture in Wales Large pig and poultry farms are already covered by environmental permitting gov.wales/sites/default/files/publications/2019-04/code-of-goodregulations, and there may be controls on a wider range of farms in the future.
agricultural-practice-guidance-on-reducing-ammonia-emissions.pdf The UNECE Gothenburg Protocol and the National Emissions Ceiling Regulations (2018) have been implemented to control ammonia emissions (among other pollutants) at the national level. Both the protocol and the regulations have national emission reduction commitments from 2020, with more stringent commitments from 2030.
Several measures can be used to decrease the ammonia emissions from agricultural activities, e.g. effective manure management from collection and storage to application to land. Substantial reduction in ammonia emissions from slurry and digestate applications can be achieved through injection, trailing-shoe and trailing-hose techniques, when compared with splash-plate or broadcast application methods.
Good nutrient management 7


---
Crop nutrient requirements Excess application of nutrients, or application at the wrong time, can reduce crop quality and cause problems such as lodging of cereals or increases in foliar pathogens. Excessively large amounts of one nutrient in a readily In addition to carbon (C), hydrogen (H) and oxygen (O), there are 13 known plant-available form in the soil solution may also decrease the availability elements that are essential for plant growth and they can be divided into or uptake of another nutrient by the root.
two groups:
Other elements found in plants, which may not be essential for their growth, • Macronutrients – nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), calcium (Ca), include cobalt (Co), nickel (Ni), selenium (Se), silicon (Si) and sodium (Na).
magnesium (Mg) and sulphur (S) are required in relatively large amounts • Micronutrients (trace elements) – iron (Fe), copper (Cu), manganese (Mn), Sodium has a positive effect on the growth of a few crops, e.g. sugar beet.
Some elements, such as cobalt, iodine (I), nickel and selenium, are important zinc (Zn), boron (B), molybdenum (Mo) and chlorine (Cl) are required in in animal nutrition and are normally supplied to the animal via plants and smaller amounts than the macronutrients through supplementary feeds. Therefore, it is important that they are The names macronutrient and micronutrient do not refer to relative importance available in the soil for uptake by plant roots.
in plant nutrition. A deficiency of any one of these elements can limit growth All these elements are taken up by plant roots from the supply in the soil and result in decreased yield and less efficient use of other nutrients.
solution (the water in the soil). They are absorbed in different forms, have It is, therefore, important to ensure there is an optimum supply of all nutrients. different functions and mobility within the plant, so cause different deficiency, For example, if a plant is seriously deficient in potassium it will not be able to or, very occasionally, toxicity effects and symptoms.
fully utilise any added nitrogen and reach its full potential yield; any unutilised nitrogen may be lost from the field.
Further information In the UK, the following two conventions are used:
• For fertiliser contents and recommendations, phosphorus is expressed Trace elements in beef and sheep production ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/trace-elements-in-beef-andin the oxide form, phosphate (P2O5), and potassium as potash (K2O).
sheep-production Sulphur, magnesium and sodium are also expressed in oxide forms (SO3, MgO and Na2O) • Soil and crop analysis reports usually show elemental forms, for example mg P/kg or mg K/l Timing nutrient application correctly is as important as applying the right amount. Crop demand varies throughout the season and is greatest when a crop is growing quickly. Rapid development of leaves and roots during the early stages of plant growth is crucial to reach the optimum yield at harvest, and an adequate supply of all nutrients must be available during this time.
The amount of a nutrient taken up by a crop may exceed the amount that will be removed in the crop at harvest. For example, at its peak, a high-yielding cereal crop may have taken up the equivalent of 300 kg/ha K2O, but less than half of this amount may be removed in the grain plus straw at harvest.
8


---
Integrated plant nutrient management Important soil properties Crops obtain nutrients from several sources: Soil texture • Mineralisation of soil organic matter (all nutrients) Knowledge of the soil type in each field is important for making accurate • Deposition from the atmosphere (mainly nitrogen and sulphur) decisions on lime and fertiliser use. Assessment of topsoil texture is essential to determine lime requirement; both topsoil and subsoil textures are needed • Weathering of soil minerals (especially potash) to determine soil-retention properties and associated nitrogen and sulphur • Biological nitrogen fixation (legumes) recommendations.
• Application of organic materials (all nutrients) Without this knowledge, it is not possible to use the recommendations in this • Application of manufactured fertilisers (all nutrients) guide effectively. Time is well spent, therefore, in acquiring this information because it is an intrinsic property of the soil that does not change with time.
For good nutrient management, the total supply of nutrients from all these In this guide, soil type is related to soil texture. Soil texture is defined by the sources must meet, but not exceed, crop demand. Crop demand varies proportion of sand-, silt- and clay-sized mineral particles in the soil and can with species (and sometimes variety of the crop), yield potential (this in turn be determined in a number of ways:
depends on soil properties, weather and water supply) and intended use (e.g. feed wheat). • Assessment of texture by hand using the method described in Figure 1.1 Nutrients should be applied as organic materials or fertilisers if the supply • Laboratory analysis of the proportion of the different mineral particles in from other sources fails to meet crop demand. Where nutrients are applied, the soil, followed by classification using the texture triangular diagram the amounts should be just sufficient to bring the total supply to meet crop given in the Think soils guide need. However, in some cases, it might be appropriate to build the Soil Index • Use of the UK Soils Observatory (UKSO) ‘Soils Map Viewer’ or the UKSO and that will require the application of more fertiliser than crop demand.
‘mySoil’ App, which gives access to a European soil properties map Recommendation methods used in this guide allow the user to take account • Soil series for a field can be identified from the Regional Soil Maps for of all sources of nutrients, maximising economic return and minimising costly England and Wales, with classification from the accompanying Brown Book nutrient loss to water and air.
(available from the National Soil Resources Institute at Cranfield University) Information in this guide can be used to develop a whole-farm nutrient or regional bulletins. Soil series scale maps or soil inspection will be needed management plan to make the best cropping choices and use of resources to determine soil type across the farm throughout the rotation. It can be used to make the most of on-farm nutrient supply in soil and organic manures, as well as bought-in Further information nutrient inputs, such as fertiliser, feed and organic manures. Planning cropping and grass rotations (including cover cropping and the use of UK Soils Observatory mySoil app legumes), incorporating soil, nutrient, manure and crop management ukso.org over several years can help build soil fertility and reduce reliance on purchased inputs.
Integrated plant nutrient management/Important soil properties 9


---
Assessment of soil texture Is the moist soil Does the soil stain 1. Take about a dessert spoonful of soil. predominantly rough YES the fingers? NO Sand and gritty?
2. If dry, wet up gradually, kneading thoroughly between finger YES and thumb until soil crumbs are broken down.
3. Enough moisture is needed to hold the soil together and to Is it difficult to roll the show its maximum stickiness. NO soil into a ball? YES Loamy sand 4. Follow the paths in the diagram to determine the texture.
NO Further information Sandy loam Does the soil feel NO smooth and silty Think soils Does the soil mould as well as gritty? YES ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/thinksoils to form an easily Sandy silt loam deformed ball and GREATSoils feel smooth and silky ahdb.org.uk/greatsoils (buttery)? YES Silt loam NO CCllaayy llooaamm YES Does the soil mould to form a strong ball which smears, but Also rough does not take and gritty YES Sandy clay loam a polish?
Also smooth NO YES Silty clay loam and buttery Does the soil mould YES Clay like plasticine, polish and feel very sticky when wet? Also rough and gritty YES Sandy clay Also smooth and buttery YES Silty clay Figure 1.1 Assessment of soil texture by hand 10


---
Soil structure The amount of organic matter in a soil depends on the farming system, the soil type and climate. The interplay between the first two factors is that, in general, To achieve optimum economic yields, crops have to acquire sufficient for the same farming system, a clay soil holds more organic matter than a nutrients and water from the soil via the roots. It is, therefore, important to sandy soil and, for the same soil type, a grassland soil holds more organic maintain good soil structure so that root growth is not adversely affected matter than an arable soil.
by poor physical soil conditions such as compaction.
It is difficult to define a critical level of soil organic matter because there are Soil mineral particles can be aggregated together and stabilised, either by so many combinations of soil type and farming system. However, maintaining clay or organic matter, to form crumbs. Within and between these crumbs are and, where possible, increasing soil organic matter should be a priority.
pores (voids) that can be occupied by air or water, both of which are required for roots to function properly. Soil organic matter can be improved by applying bulky organic manures, such as green compost and farmyard manure, and, over the longer term, If the diameter of the pores is too small, root tips cannot enter and roots by incorporating green manures and cover crops into rotations.
cannot grow to find water and nutrients. If pores are too large, water drains rapidly from the soil and roots will not grow because the soil contains too Soil mineral matter little moisture.
The types of mineral matter in a soil affect the reserves of plant nutrients The aggregation of soil mineral particles defines soil structure. For example, and their availability. For example, a soil containing minerals from igneous sands are often without any recognised structure, while loamy soils can have sources is likely to contain more potash and iron than a chalky soil, which will an excellent one. Developing and maintaining a good soil structure depends contain more calcium. Soils overlying chalk are typically alkaline (pH above 7), greatly on good soil management, including cultivation at appropriate times while those overlying sandstone are typically acidic.
and depths and minimising traffic over the soil when it is too wet.
Stone content and rooting depth Soil organic matter A large content of impermeable stones increases the speed of water Soil organic matter helps bind soil mineral particles of sand, silt and clay movement through the soil and because there is less fine soil to hold nutrients, into crumbs. It has a number of important functions in crop nutrition, such as:
the availability of water and nutrients is lower than in largely stone-free soils.
• Improving soil structure, enabling roots to grow more easily throughout Soil rooting depth is important and many crops have root systems with the the soil to find nutrients potential to grow to a metre deep or more. In deep friable soils where roots • Holding phosphorus and potassium ions (the forms taken up by roots) can grow to depth, they can take up water and nutrients leached from the very weakly so that they are readily available for uptake by roots surface soil. Shallow soils over hard rock and compacted soil layers limit • Holding a store of organic forms of nitrogen, phosphate and sulphur from root growth, restricting nutrient and water availability and limiting crop yields.
which available forms of these nutrients are released by microbial action Further information Soil organic matter ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/soil-organic-matter Important soil properties 11


---
Table 1.1 Optimum soil pHa Soil acidity and liming Soil pH is a measure of acidity or alkalinity; it is a logarithmic scale, where pH 6.0 is 10 times more acidic than pH 7.0. It is important to maintain the appropriate soil pH. It can be measured in the laboratory using a soil sample taken from the field or directly in the field using a soil test kit.
When determined in the laboratory, pH is usually measured in a soil/water suspension. The natural pH of a soil depends on the nature of the material from which it was formed. It ranges from about pH 4 (very acidic), when most crops will fail, to about pH 8 for soils naturally rich in calcium carbonate (lime) or magnesium carbonate.
For soils with a pH lower than 7, natural processes (e.g. rainfall, crop growth a. The optimum pH is based on soil that has been correctly sampled. In some soil samples and leaching of calcium in drainage water) and some farming practices containing fragments of free lime, analysis of the ground-soil sample in the laboratory can (e.g. use of some nitrogen fertilisers) tend to acidify soil. Acidifying processes give a misleadingly high value for pH.
can cause soil pH to fall quite quickly, and regular pH checks are advisable. b. In arable rotations, maintaining soil pH between 6.5 and 7.0 is justified if you are growing Such acidifying processes rarely affect the pH of calcareous soils, except acid-sensitive crops such as sugar beet.
perhaps in the top few centimetres where the soil is undisturbed. If problems are suspected, soil pH should be checked.
The optimum availability of most plant nutrients in soil occurs over a small range of soil pH values. Unfortunately, the range for each nutrient is not the same, but there is sufficient overlap in the ranges to decide the best possible compromise for each cropping system and soil type. The optimum pH for each soil type and cropping system is shown in Table 1.1.
Soil pH can vary considerably metre by metre. Maintaining the mean pH in each field or 5 ha block at the optimum level should avoid patches that are well below target (e.g. below pH 5.6 on mineral soils), thereby maintaining crop yield and quality.
Alternatively, in variable fields, Global Positioning System (GPS) sampling for soil pH, combined with variable-rate lime application, can be cost-effective.
Identifying major soil types and yield variation in the field is a key step in establishing the need for GPS sampling.
Not correcting soil acidity can cause large yield losses, but overuse of lime is wasteful and costly, and can create problems with the availability of some nutrients.
12



| Cropping system                            | Mineral soils   |   Peaty soils |   Organic |   Subsoil |
|:-------------------------------------------|:----------------|--------------:|----------:|----------:|
| Continuous arable cropping                 | 6.5b            |           5.8 |       6   |       6.3 |
| Grass with an occasional barley crop       | 6.2             |           5.5 |       5.7 |       6   |
| Grass with an occasional wheat or oat crop | 6.0             |           5.3 |       5.5 |       5.8 |
| Continuous grass or grass-clover swards    | 6.0             |           5.3 |       5.5 |       5.8 |


---
It is important to maintain the optimum pH for the farming system; insufficient Lime recommendations pH management and lack of attention to liming will cause yield losses, while For each field, the amount of lime to apply will depend on the current soil pH, excessive liming may trigger trace element deficiencies, as well as accelerating soil texture, soil organic matter and the target pH, which should be 0.2 pH lime losses. The pH range for optimum availability of most plant nutrients points above optimum. Clay and organic soils need more lime than sandy (Figure 1.2) varies somewhat between types of crops and is lower on high soils to increase pH by one unit. A lime recommendation is usually for a organic matter soils. The calculation from Table 1.2 gives broad guidance 20 cm depth of cultivated soil or a 15 cm depth of grassland soil.
according to cropping system and soil type.
Table 1.2 gives examples of the recommended amounts of lime (t/ha of ground 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 10 limestone or chalk, neutralising value (NV) 50–55) required to raise the pH of Very Very Very different soil types to achieve the target pH level shown in the footnotes.
Extreme strong Strong Medium Slight slight Moderate strong acidity acidity acidity acidity acidity acidity Slight alkalinity alkalinity Strong alkalinity alkalinity Table 1.2 Lime recommendations in terms of tonnes of lime (NV50) to apply per hectare Acidity H+ ION concentra Figure 1.2 Optimal nutrient availability at a range of pH a. For mineral and organic soils, the target soil pH is 6.7 for continuous arable cropping and 6.2 for grass. Aim for 0.2 units above the optimum pH.
b. For peaty soils, the target soil pH is 6.0 for continuous arable cropping and 5.5 for grass.
Aim for 0.2 units above the optimum pH.
Soil acidity and liming 13



| Nitr                             | ogen            |       |
|:---------------------------------|:----------------|:------|
| Phosp Potas Sul Cal Magn Ir Mang | horus sium phur |       |
|                                  | cium            |       |
|                                  | esium           | OH- I |
| Bo                               |                 |       |
| Copper                           |                 |       |



| Soil type                  |        | Liming factor   | Liming recommendation (t/ha)   |                     |                     |                     |
|:---------------------------|:-------|:----------------|:-------------------------------|:--------------------|:--------------------|:--------------------|
|                            |        |                 | Initial soil pH 6.2            | Initial soil pH 6.0 | Initial soil pH 5.5 | Initial soil pH 5.0 |
| Sands and loamy sands      | Arable | 6               | 3                              | 4                   | 7                   | 10                  |
|                            | Grass  | 4               | 0                              | 0                   | 3                   | 5                   |
| Sandy loams and silt loams | Arable | 7               | 4                              | 5                   | 8                   | 12                  |
|                            | Grass  | 5               | 0                              | 0                   | 4                   | 6                   |
| Clay loams and clays       | Arable | 8               | 4                              | 6                   | 10                  | 14                  |
|                            | Grass  | 6               | 0                              | 0                   | 4                   | 7                   |
| Organic soilsa             | Arable | 8               | 4                              | 6                   | 10                  | 14                  |
|                            | Grass  | 6               | 0                              | 0                   | 4                   | 7                   |
| Peaty soilsb               | Arable | 16              | 0                              | 0                   | 8                   | 16                  |
|                            | Grass  | 12              | 0                              | 0                   | 0                   | 6                   |


---
To estimate the lime recommendation (in t/ha of ground limestone or chalk), Liming materials multiply the liming factor for each soil type and land use combination by the Liming materials in the UK are regulated under the 1991 Fertilisers Regulations, the difference between the initial (measured) and target soil pH:
which list 24 recognised materials including natural quarried limes, burnt and hydrated limes, silicate lime, seashells and lime sand, and industrial limes.
Lime Liming factor land use combination = (Target pH – Actual pH) x The effectiveness of a liming material depends on its neutralising value (NV), its requirement (Arable or Grass from Table 1.2) fineness of grinding and the hardness of the parent rock. The NV is the relative effectiveness of a liming material compared with that of pure calcium oxide The amount of lime needed to correct any subsoil (20–40 cm) acidity can be (CaO). Lime recommendations are usually given in terms of ground limestone calculated using optimum pH values in Table 1.1 and liming factors of 5 for or ground chalk (NV 50–55), but other liming materials can be used, provided arable land or 4 for grassland. For arable land, this lime can be ploughed allowance is made for differences in NV, fineness of grinding (which affects the down before the main lime application or applied in the following season.
speed of reaction in the soil) and cost. The reactivity of a product is the speed For grassland, the amount of lime needed to correct subsoil acidity can be at which it neutralises acidity. The finer and purer the product, the greater the added to the main application.
surface area exposed to the soil and therefore the more reactive it will be.
For established grassland or other situations where there is no, or only The application rate is adjusted to take account of differences in NV. The 1991 minimal, soil cultivation, no more than 7.5 t/ha of lime should be applied Fertilisers Regulations give details of the meaning and required declarations in one application, with the balance applied in the following year.
of different named liming products. In addition, materials such as sugar beet In these situations, applications of lime change the soil pH below the lime and lime-treated sewage cake contain useful amounts of lime.
surface very slowly. Consequently, the underlying soil should not be allowed The cost of different liming materials can be compared by calculating the to become too acidic because this will affect root growth and thus limit cost per unit of NV, but allowance should also be made for any differences nutrient and water uptake, which will adversely affect yield.
in particle fineness.
Maintenance and top-up applications to address lime losses, crop offtake and Some liming materials contain other useful nutrients, which should be taken other acidifying factors, can be readdressed with applications of finely ground into account when deciding which to use. For example, magnesian limestone granular and sugar beet lime to maintain the mean soil pH. Plant nutrition is (dolomitic limestone) contains large amounts of magnesium and is effective impaired in acid soil where macronutrients N, P and K are not readily available for correcting soil magnesium deficiency as well as acidity. However, many to be taken up by the plant. Managing soil pH optimises nutrient use efficiency, years of using magnesian limestone can result in an excessively high soil giving economic as well as environmental benefits. The emission of nitrous Mg Index, and excess magnesium in the soil solution may induce potash oxide is increased by compaction and waterlogging but reduced by keeping deficiency in crops.
pH at or slightly above the recommended optimum.
14


---
Example 1.1 Further information Ground limestone has an NV of 50 and costs £20/t delivered and spread.
An alternative liming material (A) has an NV of 30 and costs £17/t delivered AgLime Quality Standard and spread.
• Guarantees the regulatory quality of AQS-certified Ground limestone costs (20 x 100) / 50 = 40 pence per unit of NV. agricultural liming products on the UK market Liming material A costs (17 x 100) / 30 = 57 pence per unit of NV.
• Provides clear, concise and independent analysis and certification Provided the two materials have the same physical characteristics, aglime.org.uk the ground limestone is the more cost-effective liming material.
Agricultural Lime – The Natural Solution aglime.org.uk/library Lime application It is important to maintain the appropriate soil pH for the cropping system and soil type, and soil pH should not vary by more than ± 0.5 pH unit from the optimum. However, the timing for applying lime can be fitted in with the crops being grown. For example:
• Sugar beet and barley are sensitive to soil acidity; when needed, lime should be applied before these crops are grown • Clover is more sensitive to soil acidity than many grass species and soil pH should be maintained to encourage a clover-rich sward A liming material should always be well worked into the cultivated soil because it can take some months to increase pH throughout the topsoil. It is unwise to grow a crop which is sensitive to acidity immediately after liming a very acidic soil. If it is important to try to achieve a rapid correction in the soil surface, then top-dress with a fast-acting lime. In stony soils lime rates can be reduced, e.g. if stones comprise 20% of the soil volume, reduce lime rate by 20%.
Soil acidity and liming 15


---
Nitrogen for field crops Example 1.2 Most agricultural soils contain too little naturally occurring plant-available Maximum nitrogen to meet the needs of a crop throughout the growing season. yield B C Supplementary nitrogen applications are normally made each year to meet On-farm economic crop demand. Applying the correct amount of nitrogen at the correct time Crop yield optimum fertiliser rate is an essential feature of good crop management.
Crop nitrogen requirement Crop yield A with no The crop nitrogen requirement is the amount of nitrogen that should fertiliser be applied to give the on-farm economic optimum yield. Nitrogen recommendations for all arable crops in this guide are defined in this way.
Crop nitrogen requirement should not be confused with crop nitrogen demand, i.e. the total supply of nitrogen (including that from the soil) that is needed by the crop. From soil From fertiliser Nutrient supply Basis of the recommendations Figure 1.3 A typical nitrogen response curve Provided there are adequate supplies of water and other nutrients, nitrogen Without applied nitrogen, yield typically is low (A).
usually has a large effect on crop growth, yield and quality. Example 1.2 shows As nitrogen use increases from very small amounts, there is a large increase in a typical nitrogen response curve. Applying nitrogen gives a large increase in yield up to the ‘on-farm economic optimum’ nitrogen rate (B). This rate depends yield, but applying too much can reduce yield by aggravating problems such on the cost of the applied nitrogen and on the value of the crop (‘break-even as lodging, foliar diseases and poor silage fermentation. ratio’), as well as on the shape of the response curve.
300 When too much nitrogen is applied, a larger proportion is unused by the crop. Recommendations for cereals and oilseeds are calculated using a typical This is a financial cost and can also increase the risk of nitrogen losses to break-2e5v0en ratio to provide the best on-farm economic rate of nitrogen to water and air. apply. Substantial changes in the value of the crop produce or in the cost of nitrogen are needed to alter the recommendations. Where appropriate, At nitrogen rates up to the on-farm economic optimum, there is a roughly 200 different recommendations are given to achieve crop quality specifications constant amount of nitrogen left in the soil at harvest. At nitrogen rates above required for different markets.
the on-farm economic optimum, there will be a larger surplus of residual 150 Application of nitrogen above the on-farm economic optimum will increase nitrogen, usually as nitrate, in soil after harvest. This nitrate is at risk of loss, yield slightly, but this yield increase will be worth less than the cost of the which can cause environmental problems like leaching to ground or surface extra n1i0tr0ogen.
water and denitrification to nitrous oxide (a greenhouse gas). A Maximum yield (C) is reached at a nitrogen rate Bgreater than the on-farm econom5i0c optimum and is never a target if farm profits are to be maximised.
Application of nitrogen above point C does not increase yield, and yield falls with furth0er applications.
Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun July Aug The nitrogen can be supplied from fertiliser and/or organic materials.
16 )ah/gk(negortiN Wintercerealcropnitrogencontent SoilMineralNitrogen


---
Nitrogen supply Nitrogen losses Nitrogen supply can be from the soil, the atmosphere and organic manures, Nitrogen losses may occur by leaching, run-off, ammonia volatilisation as well as from fertiliser. and denitrification.
Soil mineral nitrogen (SMN): Nitrate-N (NO3-N) and ammonium-N (NH4-N) are Leaching: Nitrate is soluble in the soil solution and, unlike ammonium, is often called mineral nitrogen. Both are potentially available for crop uptake and not held on soil particles. Once the soil is fully wetted, nitrate may leach into the amount in the soil depends on the recent history of cropping, organic field drains or subsurface aquifers as drainage water moves through the soil.
material and nitrogen fertiliser use. The amount of winter rainfall has an important influence on the amount of nitrate leached.
Nitrogen mineralised from organic matter: Mineralisation results in the conversion of organic nitrogen to mineral nitrogen by soil microbes. Under normal conditions, ammonium-N in the soil is rapidly converted to The amount of organic nitrogen mineralised can be large: nitrate. Therefore, sources of ammonium-N will have a similar risk of leaching as sources containing nitrate when used in excess of the requirement of • On organic and peaty soils a crop.
• Where organic manures have been used for many years Run-off: During and following heavy rainfall, nitrogen in solution or in • Where nitrogen-rich, organic material is ploughed into the soil organic form can move across the soil surface and/or via drains and enter Nitrogen from the atmosphere: Small amounts of nitrogen are deposited watercourses. The amount of nitrogen lost from soil in this way will vary widely in rainfall and directly from the atmosphere. Leguminous crops, like peas, from field to field and season to season depending on the amount, timing and beans and clover, have bacteria in the nodules on the roots that can ‘fix’ intensity of rainfall and nitrogen applications. Sloping ground, proximity to atmospheric nitrogen into a form that can be used by the plant. surface waters and surface application of organic manures present particular risks of nitrogen loss in run-off.
Nitrogen from organic materials: Most organic materials contain some mineral nitrogen, which is equivalent to mineral nitrogen in manufactured Denitrification: In anaerobic soils (poorly aerated soils lacking oxygen), fertilisers. The remaining organic nitrogen becomes available more slowly nitrate can be denitrified and lost to the atmosphere as the gases nitrous oxide (see Section 2: Organic materials). (a greenhouse gas) and nitrogen (N2). Denitrification is a biological process and is most significant in wet and warm soils where there is a supply of nitrate Manufactured fertiliser nitrogen: Manufactured fertiliser nitrogen is after harvest, or where there has been a recent nitrogen application and there used to make up any shortfall in the crop’s requirement for nitrogen.
is enough organic matter for the microbes to feed on. Some nitrous oxide is formed during nitrification of ammonium-N to nitrate-N and some of this also can be lost to the atmosphere.
Ammonia volatilisation: Nitrogen may be lost to the atmosphere as ammonia gas. Significant losses commonly occur from livestock housing, livestock grazing and where organic manures are applied to fields and are not immediately incorporated by cultivation. There can also be significantly larger losses of ammonia when urea is applied to a growing crop compared with losses when other forms of nitrogen fertiliser, such as ammonium nitrate, or inhibitor-treated urea, are used.
Nitrogen for field crops 17


---
Factors influencing decisions about nitrogen use Further information The crop nitrogen requirement (the ‘on-farm economic optimum’) will depend on:
Nitrogen fertiliser adjustment calculator for cereals and oilseeds • The amount of nitrogen from all sources, including the soil and organic ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/nitrogen-fertiliser-adjustmentmaterials, which is available to achieve the optimum on-farm economic yield calculator-for-cereals-and-oilseeds • The cost of nitrogen fertiliser and the likely value of the crop Cost-benefit calculator for nitrogen fertiliser use on grassland • Any particular crop quality requirements, for example, grain protein ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/cost-benefit-calculator-for-nitrogenin bread-making wheat or in malting barley fertiliser-use-on-grassland In addition to identifying crop nitrogen requirement as accurately as possible, it may be necessary to comply with regulatory restrictions on the amount or timing of applications, for instance, in Nitrate Vulnerable Zones (NVZs).
When calculating how much manufactured fertiliser nitrogen to use, all supplies and losses of nitrogen and the efficiency of fertiliser nitrogen use by the crop must be considered.
Soil nitrogen may be immobilised by the addition of organic materials with a high carbon:nitrogen ratio. This may result in a short-term increase in nitrogen requirement. More information on such organic materials (e.g. paper crumble) is provided in Section 2: Organic materials. Data are not available on additional nitrogen requirements related to straw or high carbon:nitrogen ratio compost.
18


---
Assessing the soil nitrogen supply (SNS) Mineral residues after harvest The management and performance of a crop can have a significant effect on Soil nitrogen supply is defined as the amount of nitrogen (kg N/ha) available for the amount of residual mineral nitrogen (nitrate-N and ammonium-N) in the soil uptake from the soil by the crop throughout its entire life. It takes account of at harvest. Residues are likely to be small if the amount of nitrogen applied nitrogen losses but excludes nitrogen applied to the crop in manufactured matched, or was less than, crop requirement. The residues may be larger than fertilisers or manures. average when yields are unusually small due to disease or drought.
The SNS includes three separate components: Residues following cereals are generally lower than those following break crops. In ley–arable rotations, the nitrogen released from grass leys may soil mineral estimate of nitrogen estimate of mineralisable SNS = + + persist for up to three years following ploughing, but the most useful nitrogen nitrogen (SMN) already in the crop soil nitrogen becomes available within the first one or two seasons.
Where:
Winter cover crops • Soil mineral nitrogen (kg N/ha) is the nitrate-N plus ammonium-N content Well-established cover crops, such as mustard, forage rape or phacelia, of the soil within the normal maximum rooting depth of the crop sown after harvest can take up significant amounts of soil mineral nitrogen • Nitrogen already in the crop (kg N/ha) is the total content of nitrogen in and reduce the risk of nitrate leaching over winter. Generally, the earlier the the crop when the soil is sampled for SMN cover crop can be established, the more mineral nitrogen will be taken up.
However, there is limited evidence on the use of starter nitrogen fertiliser • Mineralisable soil nitrogen (kg N/ha) is the estimated amount of nitrogen on cover crops for better establishment; evidence to date does not show which becomes available for crop uptake from mineralisation of soil organic consistent benefits from its use.
matter and crop debris during the growing season after sampling for SMN Early destruction of a well-established cover crop by the end of February The SNS depends on a range of factors, which commonly vary from field can release useful quantities of nitrogen for the following spring crop; to field and from season to season. It is, therefore, important to assess the sufficient to increase the SNS by up to two Indices.
SNS for each field each year. The key factors influencing SNS are:
However, when cover crops are destroyed in March or later, the amount • Nitrogen residues left in the soil from fertiliser applied for the previous crop and timing of nitrogen release is difficult to predict, with factors such as a • Nitrogen residues from any organic manure applied for the previous crop high carbon-to-nitrogen ratio likely to delay mineralisation. The timing and and in previous seasons duration of nutrient uptake in the following crop is also a factor, such that • Soil type and soil organic matter content short-season crops may not have time to benefit from any mineralised nitrogen from a previous cover crop.
• Losses of nitrogen by leaching and other processes (the amount of winter rainfall is important) • Nitrogen made available for crop uptake from mineralisation of soil Further information organic matter and crop debris during the growing season Opportunities for cover crops in conventional arable rotations ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/cover-crops Assessing the soil nitrogen supply (SNS) 19


---
Effect of excess winter rainfall Nitrogen released from mineralisation of organic matter The amount of nitrate leached will depend on the quantity in the soil when the Nitrogen is released in mineral forms when microbial action breaks down soil soil reaches field capacity and through-drainage starts, the soil type and the organic matter. The rate of mineralisation depends on temperature and is amount of water draining through the soil (excess winter rainfall). usually slow over winter until soil temperature reaches around 4ºC. In organic and peaty soils, mineralisation of soil organic matter in late spring and summer The excess winter rainfall is the rainfall between the time when the soil profile results in large quantities of nitrate becoming available for crop uptake.
becomes fully wetted in the autumn (field capacity) and the end of drainage in the spring, minus evapotranspiration during this period (i.e. water lost through Soil temperature often remains higher than 4ºC for some weeks after harvest, the growing crop). supporting mineralisation in autumn that can contribute to the nitrogen requirement of an autumn-sown crop or to the risk and extent of nitrate Rainfall between the time a soil Excess winter leaching where the land remains uncropped.
= reaches field capacity and the – evapotranspiration rainfall (mm) end of drainage Long-season crops (e.g. sugar beet) will utilise more mineralised nitrogen than crops which are harvested in mid- or late summer. For example, cereals make little use of nitrogen mineralised after June.
Further information For the purposes of this guide, organic soils are considered to contain AHDB provides excess winter rainfall (EWR) data for the current season between 10 and 20% organic matter. The recommendations in the tables ahdb.org.uk/ewr for organic soils are based on an organic matter content of 15%.
Peaty soils contain over 20% organic matter. They are always at SNS Index 5 or 6 irrespective of previous cropping, manuring history, or excess winter Light sand soils and some shallow soils can be described as ‘leaky’. Nitrate in rainfall. This is because the large amounts of organic nitrogen mineralised these soils following harvest is fully leached in an average winter, even where will usually be much greater than variations in the nitrogen residues due to substantial residues are present in the autumn. The SNS Index is nearly always previous cropping.
0 or 1 and is independent of previous cropping, except in low rainfall areas or The amount of nitrogen mineralised from past applications of organic manures after dry winters.
(over one year old) is difficult to estimate. The amount will generally be small.
Deep clay and silt soils can be described as ‘retentive’. The leaching process It can be greater where there has been a history of large, regular applications is much slower and more of the nitrate residues in autumn will be available for of organic manures and in these situations it can be worthwhile to sample the crop uptake in the following spring. Differences in excess winter rainfall will soil and analyse it for soil mineral nitrogen (SMN).
have a large effect on SNS in these soils. Low levels of SNS (Index 0 and 1) are Organic nitrogen in crop debris from autumn-harvested crops usually less frequent than on sandy soils. Other mineral soil types are intermediate mineralises quickly and nitrate is liable to loss by leaching over winter in between these two extremes.
the same way as mineral nitrate residues from fertilisers. Mineralisation of Because of both regional and seasonal differences, separate SNS Index nitrogen-rich leafy debris is quicker than that of nitrogen-poor straw debris.
tables are given in Sections 3–6 for low, medium or high rainfall situations.
20


---
Organic nitrogen that is not mineralised quickly becomes available over a Field Assessment Method long time and may contribute little to the nitrogen supply of the following crop. In most situations, the SNS Index will be identified using the Field Assessment Method, which is based on field-specific information for previous cropping, Examples of cropping situations where mineralised nitrogen from crop previous fertiliser and manure use, soil type and winter rainfall. The SNS Index residues can make a useful contribution are:
is read from tables and there is no requirement for soil sampling or analysis.
• Incorporation of sugar beet tops, especially before a This method usually provides a satisfactory assessment of the SNS in late-autumn-sown crop typical arable rotations, but the Measurement Method may give a better • Where a second cauliflower crop is grown in the same season.
result where the SNS is uncertain or could be above 120 kg N/ha.
Large amounts of leafy, nitrogen-rich crop debris will be returned to the soil after harvest of the first crop and will quickly release nitrate available Measurement Method for the next crop SNS is related to the cumulative effects of farming practice over several years and can be difficult to predict in some circumstances.
Soil nitrogen supply (SNS) Index system The Measurement Method should be targeted to fields where the supply The nitrogen recommendations in this guide are based on seven SNS Indices of plant-available nitrogen in the soil could be unusually large (for example, and each Index is related to a quantity of SNS in kg N/ha. The SNS Index above 120 kg N/ha in arable rotations), particularly where organic manures can be determined using field-specific information (the Field Assessment have been used regularly in recent years.
Method) without sampling and analysis for SMN. It can also be deduced The crop nitrogen content of cereals and oilseed rape at the time of SMN using the results of soil sampling and analysis for SMN and an assessment sampling can be estimated using the scheme given in Section 4: Arable of any nitrogen already taken up by the crop (the Measurement Method).
crops. No similar scheme is available for estimating the nitrogen content A nitrogen recommendation is obtained by determining the SNS Index of of other crops at this time of year.
the field using one of these methods, then referring to the appropriate crop It is much more difficult to obtain a reliable estimate of the nitrogen that will table to obtain the nitrogen recommendation for the selected Index.
be made available from mineralisation of organic matter. On many mineral soils The SNS Index system used for arable crops, such as cereals and oilseeds with 4% or less soil organic matter, this will be relatively small and no further (Section 4: Arable crops), is not applicable for established grassland, field adjustment is needed. On organic and peaty soils, or where a large amount of vegetables or established fruit crops.
organic material (crop residues or organic manure) has been applied in recent Full details of the SNS Index system and how to use it (with examples) years, large quantities of nitrogen can be mineralised.
are given in Sections 3–6.
Assessing the soil nitrogen supply (SNS) 21


---
Table 1.3 Uptake efficiency of fertiliser nitrogen depending on the soil category Nitrogen uptake efficiency by crops The efficiency of uptake of nitrogen from different sources varies, even for well-grown crops. Provided that the total SNS does not exceed demand, where the amount of SMN present within normal rooting depth is in the range 50–100 kg N/ha, on average, crops will take up an amount of soil nitrogen that is roughly equivalent, i.e. SMN is used with apparently 100% efficiency.
The efficiency with which SMN is recovered is likely to be less than 100% (and might typically be closer to 60%). This should be compensated for by additional soil nitrogen that becomes available for uptake during the growing Timing of nitrogen applications season, mainly through mineralisation of crop residues and soil organic matter.
Correct timing of nitrogen fertiliser application is important so that crops make However, for individual situations, actual efficiency of SMN use and the supply the best use of the nitrogen applied and there is minimum risk of losses and of mineralised N are likely to vary.
adverse environmental impact. As a general principle, nitrogen should be SNS estimates of less than 50 kg N/ha should be treated as 50 and no less. applied at the start of periods of rapid crop growth and nitrogen uptake.
Unless high SNS results (>160 kg N/ha) are confidently expected due to the The timing of nitrogen application can also have a range of other important regular addition of organic manures or crop residues, they should be treated effects on crop growth and quality.
with caution.
• Too much seedbed nitrogen can reduce the establishment of The efficiency with which SMN is recovered is likely to be lower where a large small-seeded crops amount is present, especially in the autumn below topsoil depth, on sandy soils or in high rainfall situations where nitrate leaching losses will be greater. • Early spring nitrogen will increase tillering of cereals. This may be Early establishment of crops may help to reduce losses and increase the beneficial, but too much nitrogen at this stage can increase the uptake of SMN. risk of lodging and reduce the potential bushel weight • Late-applied nitrogen will increase the grain nitrogen/protein The application of amounts of nitrogen in line with crop requirement does not concentration of cereals appear to decrease the uptake of soil nitrogen. However, the efficiency of uptake of both fertiliser and soil-derived nitrogen is often reduced for crops Recommended nitrogen timings for individual crops are given in the suffering from the adverse effects of disease, poor soil conditions, drought recommendation tables. However, NVZ rules relating to closed periods or other growth-inhibiting problems. take priority and may also influence the timing of nitrogen applications.
Research has shown that the uptake efficiency of fertiliser nitrogen by winter wheat and winter barley varies depending on the soil type. The values shown in Table 1.3 are largely based on work with ammonium nitrate and values for other types of nitrogen fertiliser may be different in some circumstances. For example, on light sand soils, 70 kg N/ha is taken up by the crop for every 100 kg N/ha applied as fertiliser.
The winter wheat and winter barley recommendations in this guide are adjusted to take account of these differences in nitrogen fertiliser uptake efficiency due to soil type.
22



| Soil category                                |   Uptake efficiency (%) |
|:---------------------------------------------|------------------------:|
| Light sand soils                             |                      70 |
| Medium, clay, silty, organic and peaty soils |                      60 |
| Shallow soils over chalk and limestone       |                      55 |


---
Further information Tried & Tested w.nutrientmanagement.org The effect of economic changes As a general principle, the recommendations are insensitive to changes in the value of the crop produce or the cost of nitrogen fertiliser. It would A normally require a large change in the ratio of the value of a crop and the B cost of nitrogen fertiliser to alter the recommendation.
The break-even ratio is the crop yield (kg) needed to pay for 1 kg of nitrogen.
If there are large changes in the ratio (the break-even ratio), it will be Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug appropriate to make adjustments in the recommendations.
Winter cereal crop nitrogen content Soil mineral nitrogen Cost of nitrogen (pence/kg) Break-even ratio = Value of crop produce (pence/kg) Figure 1.4 shows the typical pattern of nitrogen uptake by a winter wheat The prices can be expressed in £/kg as long as both are in the same crop. It is easy to see why there is no benefit from applying autumn nitrogen to units (p/kg or £/kg). The nitrogen recommendation tables for wheat, barley, winter cereal crops. The nitrogen requirement is small during the autumn and oats and oilseed rape (Section 4: Arable crops) show how to calculate winter and the supply from soil reserves is adequate to meet the requirement. adjustments to take account of the cost of nitrogen and the selling price However, autumn nitrogen is recommended for establishment of some winter of the grain produced.
oilseed rape crops, reflecting the larger requirement for nitrogen of this crop in autumn.
Figure 1.4 shows:
• In autumn/winter (A), there is only a small crop nitrogen requirement that can easily be met by soil nitrogen reserves. There is no need to apply nitrogen in autumn • The main period of nitrogen uptake (B) is March–June, and during this growth period there is usually insufficient soil nitrogen to support unrestricted growth. Nitrogen fertiliser should be applied at the start of, and during, this period of growth Assessing the soil nitrogen supply (SNS) 23 )ah/gk( negortiN 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 Figure 1.4 Nitrogen uptake by a winter cereal crop in relation to available soil nitrogen


---
Example 1.3 Phosphate, potash and magnesium for Ammonium nitrate (34.5% N) costs £230/t or 230 x 100 = 67p/kg N field crops 34.5 x 10 Wheat is sold for £110/t or 110 x 100 = 11 pence/kg Phosphate, potash and magnesium applied in fertilisers and manures move 1,000 slowly through the soil unless carried down through cracks or by earthworm activity. Many soils can hold large quantities of these nutrients in forms that are potentially available for crop uptake, after release from fixed forms.
The break-even ratio is 67 ÷ 11 = 6 Crop-available levels are much smaller than potentially available levels.
Consequently, managing the supply of these nutrients for optimum yield is Further information based on maintaining appropriate amounts in the soil for the needs of the rotation, rather than on those of an individual crop. In practice, this means AHDB UK Fertiliser Price Series maintaining target Soil Indices that ensure optimal phosphate, potash and ahdb.org.uk/GB-fertiliser-prices magnesium nutrition.
As the amount of crop-available phosphate or potash in the soil increases from a very low level, crop yield increases, rapidly at first, then more slowly Alternative approaches to nitrogen decisions until it reaches a maximum. Typically, maximum yield of arable crops or There is ongoing research into new approaches and techniques for deciding grass is reached at Index 2 for phosphorus and Index 2- for potassium.
on nitrogen fertiliser use. The use of spectral reflectance sensors is one example The principle for phosphate and potash management is to maintain the soil that is increasingly being used to assess nitrogen requirement in the field.
at the appropriate target Index. If the Index is lower than the target, yield may Other fertiliser nitrogen recommendation systems are based on models of crop be reduced and additional phosphate and potash should be applied. If the growth and nitrogen uptake or on soil sampling to shallower depths than 90 cm.
Index is higher than the target, savings can be made by reducing or omitting Some include a measurement of mineralisable nitrogen in a soil sample.
applications until the soil level falls to the target Index.
Provided a recommendation system takes proper account of the total amount of Effective use of target Indices depends on representative soil sampling.
nitrogen needed by a crop and of the supplies available from the soil and organic If it is felt that significant areas of the field could differ in P or K Index, manures, it should give a recommendation close to crop nitrogen requirement.
these areas should be sampled and treated separately.
Soils can be maintained at the current Index by replacing the amount of each nutrient removed from the field in the harvested crop. These amounts can be calculated from the actual or estimated yield (including straw if removed) and the concentration of the nutrient in the harvested product(s) as analysed or assumed (see Sections 3–6).
To check that this approach is maintaining the required P or K Index (i.e. the phosphate and potash status of the soil), soil sampling should be carried out every 3–5 years, at a suitable time in the crop rotation. Maintaining the appropriate level of phosphate and potash in the soil is especially important, as once a deficiency has occurred, a fresh application of phosphate and potash is unlikely to be available for uptake by roots in time to benefit the crop being grown.
24


---
Managing soil phosphate, potash and magnesium supply Collate soil nutrient results with estimates of nutrient removals. Note whether soil nutrient changes are large or small and whether they are explained by An appropriate approach for managing phosphate, potash and nutrient balances (additions minus removals). If available, use an appropriate magnesium to maintain soil fertility must take account of:
spreadsheet, or proprietary software, to integrate soil analyses and crop • Current Soil Index in the field removal data and deduce necessary nutrient balances for maintenance, • Target Index or critical level of each nutrient for the rotation and nutrient amounts needed to build up or run down soil levels.
• Need to build up, maintain or run down the Soil Index Sampling of the subsoil (30–60 cm) can give useful information on soil nutrient • Responsiveness of all crops in the intended rotation to a fresh supply and on lime requirement. Deep-rooting crops like cereals and sugar application of each nutrient beet exploit the subsoil which can differ from topsoil in nutrient concentrations • Quantity of each nutrient removed from the field in crop produce and in pH. These crops can obtain 30% or more of their potassium supply from the subsoil. Ploughing under manure or potash fertiliser could be • The quantity of each nutrient applied in any organic materials considered where sub-soil testing reveals low potassium (Index 0 or low 1).
(Section 2: Organic materials) For advisory purposes, the soil nutrient results are usually given as Recommendations for phosphate and potash applications to build up soils and milligrams of phosphorus, potassium and magnesium per litre of soil maintenance applications are given in Sections 3–7. The recommendations are (mg P/litre, mg K/litre, and mg Mg/litre). The results are also given as an given as kg/ha of P2O5, K2O and MgO. This is because the concentrations of Index and the Indices range from 0 to 9. The Index system is based on the phosphorus and potassium are expressed in this way in fertilisers and this likely response of a crop to a fresh application of the nutrient. Index 0 soils are makes it easier to calculate the amount of fertiliser to apply.
deficient and there would be an increase in yield by applying phosphate or potash. As the Index number increases, the response to a fresh application of Soil sampling and analysis fertiliser declines and for most soils growing arable crops, there would be no, Good management of pH, soil phosphate, potash and magnesium depends or only a very small, response at Index 2.
on soil sampling and analysis. Levels of these nutrients in the soil change The fertiliser recommendations given in this guide are based on the results only slowly, so soil sampling and analysis can be done every 3–5 years at of soil analysis using the following standard laboratory methods (Table 1.4).
an appropriate time in the crop rotation. It is usually safe to use soil analysis These methods, which are well-tried and tested over many years, are results for phosphorus, potassium and magnesium as a basis for fertiliser appropriate for soils in England and Wales.
recommendations for up to four years from the date of sampling.
In variable fields, GPS sampling of soils for pH, P, K and Mg, combined with Table 1.4 Method of extraction for phosphorus, potassium and magnesium variable-rate nutrient and lime applications, can be cost-effective. Identifying significant changes in soil type or yield variation in the field is a key step in establishing the need for GPS sampling.
The analytical results will only be meaningful if an adequate, representative soil sample is taken. The recommended procedure for sampling soils is described in Sections 3–7.
It is best to use the same laboratory for all successive batches of samples and interpret the results together. Compare results with previous results from the same land. Investigate any odd or inconsistent analyses. Repeat (sample and analyse) any inexplicable results.
Phosphate, potash and magnesium for field crops 25



| Nutrient                         | Method of extraction                                                              |
|:---------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Phosphorus (P)                   | Measured in a sodium bicarbonate soil extract at pH 8.5 (Olsen P)                 |
| Potassium (K) and magnesium (Mg) | Measured in an ammonium nitrate soil extract (exchangeable K and exchangeable Mg) |


---
Crop analysis A guide to classification of clays is given in Table 1.5. High-potash-releasing Crop analysis can target leaves, to indicate whether the P or K concentrations clays release up to 50 kg K2O/ha in crop-available form each year without any reduction in K index; intermediate clays release smaller but significant amounts.
in crops are at, or below, optimum levels at a particular point in time. Analyses of grains, tubers and other harvested materials can also be used to check the On such soils, if potash historically has not been applied, it is essential to final crop nutrient status and nutrient offtakes. monitor crop yields to ensure that the yield potential of the site is being reached; if this is not the case then potash fertilisers ought to be applied.
Crop analysis should not be a substitute for a good soil-testing programme Some potash application is likely to be needed when there are large removals and it will be more effective when used in conjunction with soil testing.
in baled cereals, forage or energy crops. Regular soil testing remains necessary To provide meaningful information, testing should be carried out at a defined because where the soil K level is allowed to fall below the target index, the growth stage and on a specific part of the plant, for which standard thresholds quantity of potash required (over and above offtake) to raise the level in the are known. For example, for winter wheat, testing is best carried out on the soil can be greater for potash-releasing clays than it is for other clay soils.
newest fully expanded leaf blade during stem extension (between GS31 and GS39). At such times, diagnostic sampling in good and bad parts of a crop Table 1.5 Classification of clays can be a useful method to determine whether there is a nutrient deficiency.
High-potash-releasing clays* Intermediate Non-releasing clays Laboratories typically analyse plant tissue for nutrients by measuring their concentrations in the dry matter. Critical or threshold concentrations are known Chalky boulder clay Decalcified boulder clay Clay-with-flints for some nutrients in some crop species (see Sections 3–7). Threshold levels Gault clay Clayey over limestone, Carboniferous clay tend to decrease as the crop grows. A threshold level of 0.32% P in wheat Kimmeridge clay lower chalk or marl Northern till grain has been shown in recent research. P and K concentrations can also be Oxford clay London clay measured in the leaf tissue water (cell sap) on farm using appropriate equipment, Charmouth (Lias) clay Weald clay but these are prone to short-term fluctuations and may be less useful. Triassic (red) clays Potash-releasing clay soils *Where topsoil is medium textured or has stones (apart from chalky boulder clay), move to Intermediate category.
Depending on the nature of the minerals in the parent material from which they were developed, some heavy clay soils contain large quantities of potash.
Weathering (breakdown) of these minerals releases the potash, which gradually becomes available for crop uptake.
Unfortunately, no routine soil analysis method is available to estimate the amount or rate of release of this potash. However, the potash that is released goes to the readily crop-available pool measured by soil analysis so that this value does not decline as quickly if the amount of potash applied is less than that removed in the harvested crops.
Local knowledge and past experience can be useful when assessing the potash-release characteristics of clay soils. If the crop-available potash status of a clay soil changes little when the potash balance is consistently negative over a number of years, this is a useful indicator that potash is being released from the clay by weathering.
26


---
Target Soil Indices Further information Crop-available nutrients are estimated by the laboratory methods given in For further information on structural assessment of soils the following Table 1.4 (page 25). Critical values for all three nutrients are represented by resources could be used:
target Indices. Fertiliser and organic material applications should aim to raise the Index to the appropriate target for the rotation (Table 1.6) and then to Think soils maintain this target by maintenance applications. ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/thinksoils Healthy grassland soils – Four quick steps to assess soil structure Table 1.6 Target Soil Indices for soil P and K ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/healthy-grassland-soils Visual evaluation of soil structure ahdb.org.uk/vess Maintaining the Soil Index The amount of phosphate and potash required for maintenance, in kg P2O5/ha a. In rotations where most crops are autumn-sown, soils are in good condition (use VESS and kg K2O/ha, can be calculated from the yield of the crop that is to be score below) and P is applied annually, high Index 1 can be an adequate target. removed from the field and its nutrient content. Typical values for the content of phosphate and potash in crops are given in Sections 3–7, or contents can b. If vegetables are only grown occasionally as part of an arable rotation, it will be most economic to target Index 2 for arable and forage crops. be determined by direct analysis.
c. Try to maintain the midpoint in these target indices to allow for variation across the area sampled. For cereals, offtake in grain plus straw (where removed) can be determined from an estimate of grain yield alone. Where that applies, recommendations in this The amount of applied P required (over and above offtake) to raise soil guide assume that, on average, removed straw weight is 50% of grain yield.
P levels will vary according to soil type and farming system; to determine However, straw removals can vary substantially and may be best estimated on these amounts see the detailed guidance on soil sampling and analysis in an individual basis.
Sections 3–7. The phosphate and potash recommendations in this guide for arable crops grown on Index 2 soils are based on typical yields as indicated in the individual crop On calcareous soils (with free calcium carbonate), it may not be possible to recommendations (for example, 8 t/ha for winter wheat). For cereals and oilseeds, maintain Olsen P at the target Index due to the rapid P reversion processes.
where targeted yield is significantly greater or less than typical, the amounts of In these situations, it may be more appropriate to maintain soils at P Index 1 phosphate and potash likely to be removed by the crop should be calculated and apply fresh P fertiliser on an annual basis to achieve the yields expected as shown in Example 1.4 (page 29). This amount should be used as the at P Index 2.
maintenance application at the target Index.
Where crops are grown on soils below the target P Index, it may be possible For potatoes, only potash should be adjusted in this way. The amount of to raise yields to the level achieved at the target Index by applying phosphate phosphate removed by potatoes is usually much less than the amount applied.
fertiliser at higher than recommended rates. However, this is generally not The residue from this surplus application should be taken into account possible at P Index 0.
for the following crop.
Efficient use of P and K is most likely to be achieved on soils that are well Replacing the phosphate and potash removed in the harvested crop may not structured and enable good rooting. For visual evaluation of soil structure maintain the appropriate Soil Index. Therefore, sample and analyse the soil at (VESS), a score of 1 or 2 would be considered adequate.
least every 3–5 years to check that the target Index is being maintained.
Phosphate, potash and magnesium for field crops 27



|                                      | Soil P (mg/litre)   | Soil K (mg/litre)   |
|:-------------------------------------|:--------------------|:--------------------|
| Arable, grassland and forage cropsac | Index 2 (16–25)a    | Index 2- (121–180)  |
| Vegetablesbc                         | Index 3 (26–45)b    | Index 2+ (181–240)  |


---
No replacement application is shown for magnesium for a number of reasons. Table 1.7 Adjusting applications for Soil Index The amounts of magnesium removed in a harvested crop tend to be small, perhaps 10–15 kg MgO/ha, and it appears that this amount of magnesium can be released during the weathering of clay minerals in many soils.
Consequently, the amount of exchangeable magnesium in soil tends to change slowly. Rather than an annual replacement, it is better to monitor change in exchangeable magnesium and apply fertiliser when the soil declines to Mg Index 1, especially to sensitive crops like sugar beet and some vegetable crops.
Building up or running down Soil Indices To raise the level of a soil at Index 0 and 1 to Index 2 requires the application of more fertiliser than that needed for the maintenance dressing. The amount In some situations (e.g. phosphate for potatoes), the crop is likely to respond of extra fertiliser needed each time is determined by the number of years over to larger amounts of nutrients than would be recommended using the above which the Index is to be raised (Table 1.7). Raising Indices over a shorter adjustments. The recommendations given in Sections 3–7 are the higher of:
period of time minimises the period of yield loss, but in the short term will • The rate of nutrient required for maximum crop response increase the annual cost and risk of water pollution.
• The rate of nutrient based on the maintenance dressing plus the amount Large amounts of phosphate and potash may be required to raise the suggested in Table 1.7 to increase the Soil Index in 10–15 years crop-available phosphate and potash in the soil by one Index and it is difficult to give accurate amounts. Where a rapid increase in the Soil Index level is required, larger amounts of organic manures and fertilisers may be applied, but they should be ploughed For example, to increase soil Olsen P by 10 mg/l may require approximately in and well mixed with the soil by cultivation. In this situation, frequent soil 200–300 kg/ha P2O5 (i.e. 435–650 kg/ha of triple superphosphate). Similarly, analysis is recommended to ensure that the desired Index level is not exceeded.
to increase soil potash by 50 mg K/l, 300–500 kg K2O/ha as a potash fertiliser (i.e. 500–800 kg/ha of muriate of potash) may be required. Where the Soil Index is well above the target level, not applying fertiliser will allow for a gradual decline to the target level. For many arable The amount to apply at each dressing is a business decision that depends on crops and grassland, it could be appropriate not to apply any fertiliser how quickly the land manager aims to increase the asset value of the land.
unless the crop responds to a small amount placed near the seed.
Consequently, two sets of build-up application rates are shown in Table 1.7 with the approximate time over which Index 2 can be reached. These amounts If plant-available phosphate and potash are being run down, then it is have been calculated using the midpoint values for each initial Index (as mg/l), essential to follow the decline by regular soil analysis to ensure that the compared with the midpoint value of the target Index. level does not fall below the appropriate target Index.
Building up crop-available levels of phosphate and potash in soil or letting Further information them decline is a decision for the farmer to make. However, the following should be considered:
Potash Development Association PK calculator • Experimental evidence shows that applying the maintenance dressing of pda.org.uk/calculator/pkcalculator phosphate and potash fertilisers to soils at Index 0, even with the suggested addition for build-up, will rarely increase the yield of many arable crops to that achieved on Index 2 soils given the maintenance dressing alone 28



| Current P or K Index   | Adjustment to application (kg/ha)      |                                       |
|:-----------------------|:---------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------|
|                        | 10–15 year period to adjust Soil Index | 5–10 year period to adjust Soil Index |
| 0                      | +60                                    | +100                                  |
| 1                      | +30                                    | +50                                   |
| 2 or higher            | No phosphate or potash required        |                                       |


---
• Land where soil P has recently been built up to the target Index will To reduce the risk of phosphate transfer, every effort should be made to generally have less soil P reserves (immobilised but potentially available P) minimise the chance of soil erosion and prevent the unnecessary build-up than land that has been maintained at, or run down to, the target Index over of available soil phosphate. Phosphate transferred from soil to surface recent years. To avoid poor crop performance, P management of recently fresh-water bodies may cause algal blooms and other adverse effects built-up land will require more care. For example, more frequent soil and on the biological balance in the water.
crop analysis and more regular fertiliser or manure applications. Also, land Potash use in sandy and sandy loam soils recently built up to the target Index will run down more rapidly than land Sandy and sandy loam soils, together with other soils containing very little clay, that has recently been maintained at, or run down to, the target Index have a limited capacity to hold potash. On such soils, it is almost impossible to • Continuing to apply phosphate and potash as fertilisers or manures to achieve the target soil K Indices of 2- (for arable, grass and forage crops) or 2+ soils above the target Index (except where vegetable crops are grown) (for vegetables).
is an unnecessary expense and an environmental risk For sandy loams, it is generally possible to maintain soil at 150 mg K/l Example 1.4 (Index 2-), but for sands and loamy sands, the realistic upper limit is 100 mg K/l (upper Index 1). Adding potash fertilisers to try to exceed these Adjusting the application of phosphate and potash to a winter wheat crop values will result in the movement of potash into the subsoil, where it may according to the soil Index and expected yield. Regular soil analysis is only be available to deep-rooted crops.
essential to ensure the Index does not fall below the target.
On sands, it is preferable to apply and cultivate into the topsoil an amount of potash fertiliser each year to meet the potash requirements of the crop to be grown. Note that this may be higher than the expected offtake at harvest.
Responsive situations Potatoes, some field vegetables and forage maize may respond to fresh applications of phosphate, even where the soil P Index is at, or slightly above, the target Index level for the rotation. For these crops, special methods of application, such as placement or band-spreading, may be advantageous.
For some crops, particularly small-seeded vegetables, starter applications of phosphate placed close to the seed may improve establishment, even on soils at P Index 3 and above. On soils at P Index 2 and above, the amount of phosphate applied as a starter dose, together with the amount added in a. Standard recommendations assume straw yield will be 50% of grain yield. the base dressing, should not exceed the amount of phosphate required to replace that removed by the previous crop.
b. to nearest 5 kg/ha.
Soil P Index and loss of phosphate from soil Point to consider Particular care should be taken to avoid building up crop-available phosphate above the target Index. Recent research has shown that phosphate transfer There is a serious risk of damage to germinating seedlings if base from soil to surface water increases as soil P Index increases. Much of this fertiliser formulations containing potash salts are used as starter transfer is due to the loss of crop-available phosphate through land run-off.
fertilisers. For further information, consult a FACTS Qualified Adviser.
Phosphate, potash and magnesium for field crops 29



| Offtake            |                |              |                     |                |              | Application to replace offtake   |               |
|:-------------------|:---------------|:-------------|:--------------------|:---------------|:-------------|:---------------------------------|:--------------|
| Grain yield (t/ha) | PO 2 5 (kg/ha) | KO 2 (kg/ha) | Straw yielda (t/ha) | PO 2 5 (kg/ha) | KO 2 (kg/ha) | PO 2 5 (kg/ha)b                  | KO 2 (kg/ha)b |
| 6                  | 39             | 33           | 3                   | 4              | 29           | 45                               | 60            |
| 8                  | 52             | 44           | 4                   | 5              | 38           | 55                               | 80            |
| 10                 | 65             | 55           | 5                   | 6              | 48           | 70                               | 105           |
| 12                 | 78             | 66           | 6                   | 7              | 57           | 85                               | 125           |


---
Magnesium Sulphur Soil analysis gives the quantity of readily available magnesium in Mg mg/l of Sulphur is a major plant nutrient. Plants need about the same amount soil, along with an Index. The analysis is done on the same soil extract as that of sulphur as phosphorus.
used to determine potassium. Very low soil magnesium (Index 0) is common In the past, large amounts of sulphur were released into the atmosphere from on sandy/light loamy, stony or chalk soils. Low Mg (Index 1) is possible on industrial processes and this was deposited on land. However, atmospheric medium soils, especially where alkaline, though these soils have additional deposition has declined greatly in recent decades and the majority of crops reserves in the subsoil.
grown in the UK can no longer be expected to obtain much of their sulphur Potatoes, sugar beet and vegetable crops are susceptible to magnesium requirements from sulphur deposition.
deficiency and show yield responses to magnesium fertiliser at Mg Index 0 Sulphur is important because:
or 1. In such cases, 50–100 kg/ha MgO should be applied before the responsive crop. • Yield can be reduced when sulphur is deficient but visual symptoms are absent Oilseed rape and leguminous crops might respond to small applications of magnesium fertiliser at Index 1 though recent trial information is sparse. • Nitrogen fertiliser may not be fully utilised if sulphur is deficient Cereals frequently exhibit deficiency symptoms early in the season when • Correct sulphur fertilisation improves quality of grains and oilseeds root growth is restricted but these can disappear as roots grow. For light • Sulphur application is currently very cost-effective and is not loamy, stony or chalky soils in rotations of combinable crops, maintenance associated with any major environmental problems of Mg Index 1 is a satisfactory policy and could be achieved by small annual applications (10–15 MgO kg/ha) or by slightly larger amounts targeted at oilseed rape or legumes in the rotation. Larger applications are justified at Point to consider Index 0. Because magnesium is subject to leaching, fertilisation to maintain at Index 2 is unnecessary and uneconomic, although is achievable when Although roots take up sulphur as sulphate (SO4), recommended rates and fields are rotationally manured. the content of fertilisers and organic material are expressed as either SO3 or sulphur.
Where the Mg Index is low and soil acidity needs to be corrected, applying magnesian limestone may be cost-effective. An application of 5 t/ha of magnesian limestone will add at least 750 kg MgO/ha and this magnesium Sulphur deficiency will become available to the crop over many years.
There is an increasing risk of sulphur deficiency in the UK in a wide range of High magnesium is a natural property of many heavy soils which sustain crops, including cereals, oilseed rape, brassica vegetables, peas and grass.
Index 4 or 5 and soils formed on dolomitic limestones or mudstones often Oilseed rape and grass grown for silage are particularly sensitive to sulphur are Index 6. Where soil magnesium exceeds Index 5, there are some concerns deficiency.
about reduced potassium availability and about some risk of instability in soil Most soils, especially chalky or sandy soils, store very little sulphate from one structure. If such soils need lime, it is best to use a calcium lime source, which year to the next. This is because sulphate is water-soluble and easily leached.
will reduce magnesium levels gradually.
As atmospheric deposition of sulphur continues to decline, it is likely that the risk of deficiency will affect an increasingly wide range of crops grown on many different soil types.
30


---
The best guide for assessing the risk of sulphur deficiency is soil type and field The procedures for plant sampling and interpretation of analytical results are location, although fields that have received regular applications of organic given with each crop recommendation table in their relevant section of the manure are less likely to show deficiency. Nutrient Management Guide (RB209).
Sulphur is retained in soil organic matter and can become available to plants Table 1.8. Sulphur deficiency risk categories when organic matter is decomposed by soil microbes. On mineral soils, sulphur should be applied to all winter oilseed rape crops and to all cereal, grass, grain legume, brassica vegetable and sugar beet crops grown in high-risk sulphur-deficiency situations (Table 1.8).
Where sulphur deficiency has been diagnosed or is expected, it can be corrected by applying a manufactured sulphur fertiliser and/or livestock manure or biosolids (Section 2: Organic materials). As most soils store very little sulphur from one year to the next, applications of sulphur will be necessary year after year for the susceptible crop.
Sulphur in livestock manures and biosolids is available in two main forms:
• Readily available sulphur, which can be taken up immediately by the crop • Organic sulphur, which is not immediately available for crop uptake but may be mineralised to readily available sulphur over subsequent months and years Readily available sulphur + organic sulphur = total sulphur When planning the use of nutrients, it is important to make allowance for those contained in organic materials. Use Table 2.1 (Section 2: Organic materials) to determine sulphur availability from different organic materials.
Diagnostic methods Visual symptoms such as paling of young leaves and crop stunting can be used to diagnose moderate to severe cases of sulphur deficiency. However, these symptoms can be easily confused with other nutrient deficiencies or crop stress and, by the time they appear, it can be too late to correct the deficiency. It is likely to be difficult to identify the slight visual symptoms normally associated with minor sulphur deficiency that may still result in significant yield loss.
If a deficiency is suspected, tissue analysis in the spring can be a useful diagnostic tool, used in combination with the sulphur deficiency risk categories based on soil type and over-winter rainfall (Table 1.8).
Sulphur 31



| Soil category                              | Winter rainfall (Nov–Feb)   |                     |                |
|:-------------------------------------------|:----------------------------|:--------------------|:---------------|
|                                            | Low (<175 mm)               | Medium (175–375 mm) | High (>375 mm) |
| Light sand and shallow                     | High                        | High                | High           |
| Medium                                     | Low                         | High                | High           |
| Deep clayey, deep silty, organic and peaty | Low                         | Low                 | High           |


---
Sodium Micronutrients (trace elements) Sodium is recommended for certain crops (e.g. sugar beet and carrots). Micronutrients are those crop nutrients required in small amounts for Soil analysis can be used to identify the need to apply sodium for sugar beet. essential growth processes in plants and animals. Some micronutrients that are essential for animals are not required by plants, but the animal If a deficiency is suspected, ensure that an analysis package is chosen that usually acquires them via the plant.
includes sodium.
In practice, only a few micronutrients are known to be present in such The interpretation of soil analysis results is given in the crop recommendation small amounts in soil that there is a risk of deficiency in plants and animals.
tables in their relevant sections of the Nutrient Management Guide (RB209).
Deficiency is most frequently related to soil type, soil pH, soil structural At recommended rates, sodium should have no adverse effect on the conditions and their effect on root growth and crop susceptibility.
physical condition of soils.
For continuous arable cropping on mineral soils, the maximum availability of In grassland systems, it is important to maintain an adequate amount of nutrients from the soil is achieved at pH 6.5. To maintain an appropriate pH, sodium in livestock diets. Sodium application will not have any effect on test soils every 3–5 years and treat acidic soils with a liming material.
grass growth but has been reported to improve the palatability of grass.
Visual symptoms of a deficiency of a specific micronutrient are often short-lived and can be confused with those produced by other growth problems. Furthermore, by the time symptoms appear, it can be too late to correct a deficiency.
Consequently, decisions about when to apply micronutrients should be informed by crop and soil risk factors (Sections 3–7), and visual diagnosis of a micronutrient deficiency should, where appropriate, be confirmed by plant and/or soil analysis.
Soil analysis for micronutrient deficiencies may be done on the same samples taken every 3–5 years for routine analysis of P, K, Mg and pH.
If a deficiency is suspected, ensure that an analysis package is chosen that includes the micronutrients in question. In such cases, leaf analysis in the spring and/or crop analysis at harvest can be useful in reaching a diagnosis.
If such analyses indicate a deficiency, it is important to investigate further.
The soil may contain adequate amounts of the nutrient and the deficiency may simply have been caused by reduced availability, due to adverse (e.g. dry) weather conditions, poor rooting or inappropriate soil pH. For these reasons, soil samples should be taken after harvest to confirm whether deficiencies are caused by soil supplies.
32


---
Deficiencies affecting crop growth Molybdenum (Mo): Deficiency is associated with acidic soils and is not generally a problem in limed soils. Cauliflower may be affected and symptoms Boron (B): Deficiency can affect sugar beet, brassica crops and carrots on include restricted growth of the leaf lamina (‘whiptail’).
light-textured soils with a pH above 6.5, particularly in dry seasons. Symptoms include death of the apical growing point and growth of lateral buds. In sugar Soil or plant tissue analyses may be used to diagnose molybdenum deficiency.
beet, there is blackening at the leaf base and beneath the crown (‘heart-rot’). Soil analysis is usually by extraction with acid ammonium oxalate (‘Tamm’s Carrots can show a darkening of the root surface (‘shadow’). reagent’). The leaf and curd content in dry material is around 2.0 mg Mo/kg in normal cauliflower plants and around 0.35 mg Mo/kg in deficient plants.
Soil analysis prior to growing a susceptible crop is recommended. When extracted with hot water, a value less than 0.8 mg B/l dry soil is associated Zinc (Zn): Deficiency is rarely found in field crops. In the few cases with a risk of deficiency. Leaf analysis is also a useful diagnostic guide and where deficiency has been found, it has been on sandy soils, with a high a value lower than 20 mg B/kg dry matter may indicate deficiency (although pH and phosphate status. Top fruit and forest nursery stock are most the deficiency value varies between crop species). likely to be affected.
Copper (Cu): Deficiency is not widespread in crops but can occur mainly Leaf analysis is the most useful diagnostic guide and, in susceptible in cereals on sands, peats, reclaimed heathland and shallow soils over chalk. crops, less than 15 mg Zn/kg dry matter may indicate deficiency. Soil Sugar beet may also be affected. analysis is usually by EDTA extraction. For susceptible crops, a value less than 0.5 mg Zn/kg indicates a risk of probable deficiency, while less than In cereals, symptoms are yellowing of the tip of the youngest leaf, followed 1.50 mg Zn/kg indicates possible deficiency.
by spiralling and distortion of the leaf. Ears can be trapped in the leaf sheath and those that emerge have white tips. Barley awns can become white.
Deficiencies affecting livestock performance Soil analysis is useful for identifying whether deficiency is likely.
The availability of cobalt, copper and selenium does not restrict grass growth When extracted with EDTA, a value lower than 1 mg Cu/l dry soil indicates but too little in grazed crops can lead to deficiency in some animals. Where possible deficiency. The copper content of the leaf does not reliably indicate a deficiency has been correctly diagnosed, treatment of the animal with the the copper status of the plant.
appropriate trace element is usually the most effective means of control, Iron (Fe): Deficiency occurs commonly in fruit crops grown on calcareous soils though application of selenium and cobalt to grazing pastures can be effective.
but is not a problem in annual field crops. Symptoms in fruit are yellowing of the young leaves with veins remaining green. Deficiency cannot be reliably Further information diagnosed using soil or plant analysis.
Trace elements in beef and sheep production Manganese (Mn): Manganese is the micronutrient most commonly deficient in ahdb.org.uk/knowledge-library/trace-elements-in-beef-and-sheepfield crops. Deficiency occurs in many crops on peaty, organic and sandy soils production at high pH but can occur less severely on other soils when over-limed.
Susceptible crops include sugar beet, cereals and peas. In cereals, deficiency often shows as patches of pale green, limp foliage. Sugar beet leaves develop interveinal mottling and leaf margins curl inwards. Dried peas show internal discolouration when the pea is split (‘marsh spot’). Leaf analysis provides a reliable means of diagnosis, with a value lower than 20 mg/kg dry matter indicating possible deficiency. Soil analysis is not a reliable guide to deficiency.
Micronutrients (trace elements) 33


---
Fertiliser types and quality Inaccurate application of fertiliser will result in uneven crops with lower-than-expected yields and the quality may be poor. Over-application may result in adverse environmental impact from pollution.
It is important to select the most appropriate and cost-effective material from the many different types of fertiliser that are available in both solid and fluid When spreading, it is important that the particle size of a solid fertiliser is forms. The following features of a fertiliser should be considered: consistent, free of lumps and low in dust, while the components of a fluid fertiliser should remain as a uniform solution or suspension.
• The total concentration and the ratio of nutrients in the fertiliser • The chemical form of each nutrient The cost of the nutrients • The physical quality of a solid fertiliser and its suitability The cost of the nutrients in fertilisers can vary significantly. When comparing for accurate spreading fertiliser prices, it is necessary to calculate and compare the cost of each kg • The form of a liquid fertiliser, true solution or suspension of nutrient. It is the cost per hectare, not the cost per tonne, which determines the economics of a fertiliser application.
• The cost of the nutrients Low-cost fertilisers can have a poor chemical or physical quality. The availability The total concentration and the ratio of nutrients in the fertiliser of the nutrients for crop uptake must be considered, as well as the accuracy of the fertiliser spreader or sprayer that is used.
The total concentration of each nutrient in a fertiliser has to be declared.
Straight fertilisers contain just one nutrient, whereas many fertilisers contain Nitrogen fertilisers more than one. The requirements for nutrient declaration, including the chemical form of each nutrient and its availability for crop uptake, are controlled Ammonium nitrate (33.5–34.5% N)/Ammonium sulphate (21% N, 60% by national legislation originally transposed from European regulations. SO3)/Calcium ammonium nitrate (26–28% N): The nitrate-N is immediately The nutrient content of some common fertilisers is given on page 38. available for crop uptake, the ammonium-N can be taken up directly but is quickly converted to nitrate by soil microbes.
The concentration of nutrients in fluid fertilisers may be expressed as kg nutrient per tonne of fertiliser product (w/w basis) or as kg nutrient per cubic Urea (46% N): Urea is quickly converted to plant-available ammonium-N metre (1,000 litres) of fertiliser product (w/v basis). To convert from one basis by the enzyme urease which occurs in all soils.
to the other, it is necessary to know the specific gravity of the fertiliser. The Liquid nitrogen (18–30% N): Liquid nitrogen fertilisers are solutions of urea fertiliser supplier can provide this information.
and ammonium nitrate. The nitrogen is in forms that are quickly available for Concentration as w/v (kg/m3) = concentration as w/w (kg/t) x specific gravity crop uptake. Solutions based on urea alone will contain no more than 18% N because at low, ambient temperatures, urea crystallises out of solution.
The concentration of the nutrient or nutrients in a fertiliser dictates the application rate. When there is more than one nutrient, the ratio should The nitrogen content of applied urea lost to the atmosphere as ammonia varies be reasonably close to the required application of each nutrient. depending on soil and weather conditions and is typically 10 to 30%. Losses may be minimised if urea is applied shortly before rain is expected and/or is Physical nature, quality and suitability of fertiliser shallowly cultivated into the soil.
Fertilisers may be sold in many different physical forms, some of which may Recommended nitrogen rates are based on the main nitrogen source being be difficult to apply accurately. Good fertiliser practice must include accurate, ammonium nitrate, ammonium sulphate or calcium ammonium nitrate. Urea uniform application, as well as correct decisions on rate and timing. can be treated with urease inhibitors to reduce losses through volatilisation.
34


---
If untreated urea is to be used, recommended rates may need to be Potash and magnesium fertilisers adjusted to allow for losses as ammonia. It is unlikely that this adjustment Potash in most potash fertilisers is quickly available to crops. The most will be necessary if urea is treated with a urease inhibitor. For complete common potash source is muriate of potash (MOP), which is potassium agronomic advice on product choice and guidelines for use, consult a chloride (60% K2O). Kainit and sylvinite are naturally occurring mixtures FACTS Qualified Adviser.
of mainly potassium chloride and sodium chloride.
Nitrification inhibitors can slow the conversion of ammonium-N to nitrate-N.
Potassium sulphate (SOP, 50% K2O) is used for some high-value crops.
They can be added to liquid fertilisers prior to application or sprayed onto soil Potassium nitrate supplies both potassium and nitrogen and is used as prior to spreading solid fertilisers. Nitrification inhibitors can delay the release a source of both nutrients when added to irrigation systems.
of nitrate following fertiliser application, which can reduce nitrate leaching and nitrous oxide emissions. Some magnesium fertilisers are quickly available (e.g. kieserite, typically 25% MgO; and Epsom salts, 16% MgO), though others are only slowly Phosphate fertilisers available (e.g. calcined magnesite and magnesian limestone).
Water-soluble phosphate fertilisers are used very inefficiently, even by the Where both lime and magnesium are needed, magnesian limestone will often first crop. For example, recovery (judged by its effect on uptake) from triple provide a cheap, though slow-acting, source of magnesium. An application superphosphate is usually less than 10%. Until more efficient techniques of 5 t/ha of magnesian limestone will provide at least 750 kg MgO/ha and or products become available, fresh fertiliser should only be relied upon to the magnesium becomes slowly available to crops over time.
overcome small crop P deficiencies.
Sulphur fertilisers Lack of water solubility does not mean the phosphate is unavailable to crops.
For example, finely ground, phosphate rocks with close to zero water solubility Ammonium sulphate (60% SO3) and kieserite (typically 52–55% SO3) provide can be used successfully as a phosphate source on grassland where the sulphur in an immediately available form. Gypsum (calcium sulphate) is surface soil pH is maintained below pH 6.0. Some other water-insoluble somewhat less soluble but is an effective source. Polyhalite is principally a phosphates are an effective source of phosphate under appropriate soil and sulphur fertiliser that contains 48% SO3, 14% K2O, 6% MgO and 17% CaO.
weather conditions; in these situations, seek advice from a FACTS Qualified Elemental sulphur must be oxidised to sulphate before it becomes available for Adviser about their use.
uptake. The speed of oxidation depends largely on particle size and only very Water-soluble phosphate: Diammonium phosphate (DAP), monoammonium finely divided (‘micronised’) elemental sulphur will be rapidly effective. Where phosphate (MAP), triple superphosphate (TSP) and single superphosphate particle size is larger, elemental sulphur fertilisers can be used to raise the (SSP) contain phosphate that is mainly in a water-soluble form (93–95%). sulphur supply capacity of the soil over a longer period of time.
Water-insoluble phosphate: There are many different types of water-insoluble Further information phosphate with different chemical and physical characteristics. The fertiliser declaration should give details of the amount of phosphate soluble in different Fertiliser spreaders – choosing, maintaining and using acid extractants. This information does not indicate the effectiveness of these nutrientmanagement.org/fertiliser-spreader-manual sources of phosphate on different soil types. Care should be taken not to compare the solubility of water-insoluble phosphates in different reagents (for example, formic acid and citric acid) that extract different forms of phosphate.
FFeerrttiilliisseerr ttyyppeess aanndd qquuaalliittyy 35


---
Fertiliser application Accurate and even application of fertilisers is very important in order to maximise the benefits from their use to improve crop yield, quality and profitability. Even where correct decisions have been made on the amount of fertiliser to apply, inaccurate application, uneven spreading or spreading into hedgerows or ditches can cause a range of potentially serious problems, including:
• Reduced yields and/or quality caused by uneven crops (stripes), lodging and disease • Higher risk of the transfer of nutrients to watercourses at field margins, causing nutrient pollution • Higher risk of causing botanical changes in hedgerows and field margins Spreading nitrogen fertilisers and organic materials as uniformly and accurately as is practically possible to the cropped area is a requirement in NVZs. Avoiding spreading into the edges of hedgerows and ditches is a requirement of cross compliance.
Fertiliser spreaders and sprayers should be regularly maintained and serviced, replacing worn-out parts as necessary. To do this, follow the manufacturer’s instructions. Spreaders should be calibrated for rate of application every spring and whenever the fertiliser type is changed. To check spreading uniformity, catch-trays can be used. Ideally, this should be done annually or whenever faulty spreading is suspected.
Computerised analysis of the data will give the coefficient of variation (CV), which is a measure of the non-uniformity of spreading. Where the CV is larger than 15%, significant inaccuracies in fertiliser spreading are occurring.
Action should then be taken to improve the performance of the spreader.
For manure and slurry spreaders, checks should be made for mechanical condition before spreading and for rate of application during spreading.
36


---
Other sources of useful information Farming rules for water from April 2018 gov.uk/guidance/rules-for-farmers-and-land-managers-to-prevent-waterpollution ADAS adas.co.uk gov.uk/government/publications/applying-the-farming-rules-for-water/ applying-the-farming-rules-for-water Agricultural Industries Confederation agindustries.org.uk Statutory Instruments Catchment Sensitive Farming (CSF) • The Ammonium Nitrate Materials (High Nitrogen Content) Safety gov.uk/guidance/catchment-sensitive-farming-reduce-agricultural-water- Regulations 2003 (SI 1082) pollution • The EC Fertilisers (England and Wales) Regulations 2006 (SI 2486) FACTS • The Fertilisers (Amendment) Regulations 1995, No 16 basis-reg.co.uk • The Fertilisers (Amendment) Regulations 1997, No 1543 International Fertiliser Society • The Fertilisers (Amendment) Regulations 1998, No 2024 fertiliser-society.org • The Fertilisers (Sampling and Analysis) Regulations 1996 (SI 1342) Potash Development Association (PDA) • The Fertilisers Regulations 1991 (SI 2197) pda.org.uk • The Pollution Prevention and Control (England and Wales) Regulations 2000 SRUC (SI 800) sruc.ac.uk • The Sludge (Use in Agriculture) Regulations 1989 (SI 1263) Tried & Tested • The Sludge (Use in Agriculture) (Amendment) Regulations 1990 (SI 880) w.nutrientmanagement.org legislation.gov.uk Nitrate Vulnerable Zones (NVZs) – England gov.uk/guidance/nutrient-management-nitrate-vulnerable-zones Nitrate Vulnerable Zones (NVZs) – Scotland gov.scot/policies/agriculture-and-the-environment/nvz/ farmingandwaterscotland.org/know-the-rules/ Nitrate Vulnerable Zones (NVZs) – Wales gov.wales/water-resources-control-agricultural-pollution-walesregulations-2021-guidance-farmers-and-land Nitrate Vulnerable Zones (NVZs) – Northern Ireland daera-ni.gov.uk/nutrientsactionprogramme2019-2022 OOtthheerr ssoouurrcceess ooff uusseeffuull iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn 37


---
Analysis of fertilisers and liming materials The materials listed below are used individually and some are used as Potash/magnesium/sodium fertilisers Typical % nutrient content components of compound or multi-nutrient fertilisers. The chemical and Sylvinite minimum 16% K O, typically 32% physical forms of nutrient sources, as well as growing conditions, can influence 2 Na O the effectiveness of fertilisers. A FACTS Qualified Adviser can give advice on 2 Kieserite (magnesium sulphate) 25% MgO, 50% SO3 appropriate forms for different soil and crop conditions.
Calcined magnesite typically 80% MgO The reactivity, or fineness of grinding, of liming materials determines their Epsom salts (magnesium sulphate) 16% MgO, 33% SO3 speed of action. However, the amount of lime needed is determined mainly Agricultural salt 50% Na2O by its neutralising value.
Sulphur fertilisers Typical % nutrient content Nitrogen fertilisers Typical % nutrient content Ammonium sulphate 21% N, 60% SO 3 Ammonium nitrate 33.5–34.5% N Epsom salts (magnesium sulphate) 16% MgO, 33% SO 3 Liquid nitrogen solutions 18–30% N (w/w) Elemental sulphur typically 200–225% SO 3 Calcium ammonium nitrate (CAN) 26–28% N (80–90% S) Ammonium sulphate 21% N, 60% SO3 Quarried gypsum (calcium sulphate) 40% SO 3 Urea 46% N Polyhalite (e.g. Polysulphate) minimum 48% SO , 14% K O, 3 2 Urea + urease inhibitor 46% N + NBPT 6% MgO, 17% CaO Urea + nitrification inhibitor 46% N + DCD Liming materials Neutralising value (NV) Calcium nitrate 15.5% N, 26% CaO Ground chalk or limestone 50–55 Phosphate fertilisers Typical % nutrient content Magnesian limestone 50–55, over 15% MgO Single superphosphate (SSP) 18–21% P2O5, typically 30% SO3 Hydrated lime c.70 Triple superphosphate (TSP) 45–46% P2O5 Burnt lime c.80 Diammonium phosphate (DAP) 18% N, 46% P2O5 Sugar beet lime 22–29 + typically 7–10 kg P2O5, Monoammonium phosphate (MAP) 12% N, 52% P2O5 5–7 kg MgO, 4–6 kg SO3/tonne Rock phosphate (e.g. Gafsa) 27–33% P2O5 Potash/magnesium/sodium fertilisers Typical % nutrient content Muriate of potash (MOP) 60% K O 2 Sulphate of potash (SOP) 50% K2O, 45% SO3 Potassium nitrate 13% N, 45% K2O Kainit 11% K2O, 5% MgO, 26% Na2O, 10% SO3 38


---
Glossary Closed period Deposition Period of the year when nitrogen fertilisers or certain Transfer of nutrients from the atmosphere to soil or manures should not be applied unless specifically to plant surfaces. The nutrients, mainly nitrogen and Additionally available nitrogen (AAN) permitted. Closed periods apply within NVZs. sulphur, may be dissolved in rainwater (wet deposition) Nitrogen that will become available to the crop or transferred in particulate or gaseous forms through mineralisation during the growing season.
Coefficient of variation (CV) (dry deposition).
Measure of the unevenness of application of fertilisers Anion or manures. CV of 0% indicates perfectly even Digestate Negatively charged form of an atom or molecule, spreading (unachievable in practice). Correct operation Organic material produced by anaerobic digestion of for example nitrate (NO3-) and sulphate (SO4 2-).
of a well-set-up spreader should give a CV of 10% for biodegradable organic materials. May be separated fertilisers and 25% for manures under field conditions. into liquid and fibre fractions after digestion.
Available (nutrient) Form of a nutrient that can be taken up by a crop Compost Dirty water immediately or within a short period so acting as Organic material produced by aerobic Lightly contaminated run-off from lightly fouled an effective source of that nutrient for the crop.
decomposition of biodegradable organic materials. concrete yards or from the dairy/parlour that is collected separately from slurry. It does not include Band-spreading Content (nutrient) liquids from weeping-wall stores, strainer boxes, slurry Application of fertiliser or slurry in bands along a Commonly used instead of the more accurate separators or silage effluent, which are rich in nitrogen row of seeds or crop plants.
‘concentration’ to describe nutrients in fertiliser and regarded as slurries.
or organic manure. For example, 6 kg N/t often Biosolids is described as the nitrogen content of a manure. Economic optimum Treated sewage sludge.
Rate of nitrogen application that achieves the greatest Cover crop (nitrogen rate) economic return from a crop, taking Calcareous soil A crop sown primarily for the purpose of taking up account of crop value and nitrogen cost.
Soil that is alkaline due to the presence of free nitrogen from the soil and which is not harvested.
calcium carbonate or magnesium carbonate, or both.
Also called green manure. Efficiency factor Percentage of total nitrogen in a manure that is Cation Crop-available nitrogen available to the crop for which the manure was applied.
Positively charged form of an atom or molecule, The total nitrogen content of organic manure that There are mandatory minimum values in NVZs for use for example potassium (K+), calcium (Ca2+), is available for crop uptake in the growing season when estimating the nitrogen availability of manures.
magnesium (Mg2+) and ammonium (NH4+).
in which it is spread on land.
Erosion Cation exchange capacity Crop nitrogen requirement Movement (transport) of the soil by running water Capacity of the soil to hold cations by electrostatic The amount of crop-available nitrogen that must be or wind.
forces. Cations are held at exchange sites mainly applied to achieve the economically optimum yield.
on clay particles and organic matter.
Denitrification Clay Microbial conversion of nitrate and nitrite in anaerobic Finely divided inorganic crystalline particles soil to nitrogen gas and some nitrous oxide.
in soils, less than 0.002 mm in diameter.
GGlloosaarryy 39


---
Eutrophication Granular fertiliser Leaching Enrichment of ecosystems by nitrogen or phosphorus. Fertiliser in which particles are formed by rolling a Process by which soluble materials such as nitrate or In water, it causes algae and higher forms of plant mixture of liquid and dry components in a drum or pan. sulphate are removed from the soil by drainage water life to grow too fast. This disturbs the balance of Typically, particles are in the 2–4 mm diameter range. passing through it.
organisms present in the water and the quality of the water concerned. On land, it can stimulate the growth Grassland Ley of certain plants, which then become dominant so that Land on which the vegetation consists predominantly Temporary grass, usually ploughed up one to five years natural diversity is lost. of grass species. (sometimes longer) after sowing.
Excess winter rainfall Greenhouse gas Lime requirement Rainfall between the time when the soil profile Gas such as carbon dioxide, methane or nitrous oxide Amount of standard limestone needed in tonnes/ha to becomes fully wetted in the autumn (field capacity) that contributes to global warming by absorbing infrared increase soil pH from the measured value to a higher and the end of drainage in the spring, minus radiation that otherwise would escape to space. specified value (often 6.5 for arable crops). Can be evapotranspiration during this period (i.e. water determined by a laboratory test or inferred from soil pH.
lost through the growing crop). Green manure See Cover crop. Liquid fertiliser FACTS See Fluid fertiliser.
UK national certification scheme for advisers on crop Heavy metal nutrition and nutrient management. Membership is Cadmium, copper, lead, mercury, nickel or zinc. Livestock manure renewable annually. A FACTS Qualified Adviser has Elements that are potentially toxic to mammals above Dung and urine excreted by livestock or a mixture of a certificate and an identity card. critical levels. Copper, nickel and zinc are required by litter, dung and urine excreted by livestock, even in plants in very small amounts. processed organic form. Includes FYM, slurry, poultry Farmyard manure (FYM) litter, poultry manure, separated manures and granular Livestock excreta that is mixed with straw Incorporation or pelletised manures.
bedding material that can be stacked in a heap A technique (discing, rotovating, ploughing or other without slumping. methods of cultivation) that achieves some mixing Macronutrient between an organic manure and the soil. Helps See Major nutrient.
Fertiliser to minimise loss of nitrogen to the air through See Manufactured fertiliser. volatilisation and nutrient run-off to surface waters. Maintenance application Amount of phosphate or potash that must be applied Fluid fertiliser Inorganic fertiliser to replace the amount removed from a field at harvest Pumpable fertiliser in which nutrients are dissolved in Manufactured fertiliser that contains only (including that in any straw, tops or haulm removed).
water (solutions) or held partly as very finely divided inorganic ingredients or urea.
particles in suspension (suspensions). Major nutrient Layer manure Nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, magnesium, sulphur, Frozen hard Poultry excreta with little or no bedding. calcium or sodium that are needed in relatively large Soil that is frozen for more than 12 hours. Days when amounts by crops.
soil is frozen overnight but thaws out during the day do not count.
40


---
Manufactured fertiliser Nitrogen uptake efficiency Peaty soil (peat) Any fertiliser that is manufactured by an industrial Uptake of nitrogen from soil, fertiliser or manure Soil containing more than 20% organic matter.
process. Includes conventional straight and NPK expressed as a percentage of nitrogen supply from products (solid or fluid), organo-mineral fertilisers, that source. Placement rock phosphates, slags, ashed poultry manure, Application of fertiliser to a zone of the soil liming materials that contain nutrients. Nitrogen use efficiency usually close to the seed or tuber.
Ratio of additional yield produced to the amount Manure of nitrogen applied to achieve that increase. Often Poultry manure See Livestock manure and Organic material (manure). expressed as kg additional yield per kg N applied. Excreta produced by poultry, including bedding material that is mixed with excreta, but excluding duck manure Micronutrient Nitrous oxide (N O) with a readily available nitrogen content of 30% or less.
2 Boron, copper, iron, manganese, molybdenum and A potent greenhouse gas that is emitted naturally from zinc, which are needed in very small amounts by crops. soils. The amount emitted is related to the supply of Prilled fertiliser Cobalt and selenium are taken up in small amounts by mineral nitrogen in the soil. It increases with application Fertiliser in which particles (prills) are formed by crops and are needed in human and livestock diets. of manures and fertilisers, incorporation of crop allowing molten material to fall as droplets in a tower.
residues and growth of legumes. It is greater in organic Droplets solidify during the fall and tend to be more Mineral nitrogen and peaty soils than in other soils. spherical and somewhat smaller than granules (see Nitrogen in ammonium (NH4) and nitrate (NO3) forms. Granular fertiliser).
Offtake Mineralisable nitrogen Amount of a nutrient contained in the harvested crop Readily available nitrogen Organic nitrogen that is readily converted to ammonium (including straw, tops or haulm) and removed from the Nitrogen that is present in livestock and other organic and nitrate by microbes in the soil, for example field. Usually applied to phosphate and potash. manures at the time of sampling in molecular forms that during spring. can be taken up immediately by the crop (ammonium or Olsen P nitrate, or in poultry manure uric-acid N). High in slurries Mineralisation Concentration of available P in soil determined by and poultry manures (typically 35–70% of total N) and Microbial breakdown of organic matter in the soil, a standard method (developed by Olsen) involving low in FYM (typically 10–25%).
releasing nutrients in crop-available, inorganic forms. extraction with sodium bicarbonate solution at pH 8.5.
It is the main method used in England, Wales and Removal Neutralising value (NV) Northern Ireland and the basis for the Soil Index for P. See Offtake.
Percentage calcium oxide (CaO) equivalent in a material. 100 kg of a material with a neutralising value Organic material (manure) Run-off of 52% will have the same neutralising value as 52 kg Any bulky organic nitrogen source of livestock, Movement of water across the soil surface which of pure CaO. NV is determined by a laboratory test. human or plant origin, including livestock manures, may carry nutrients from applied manures or fertilisers.
biosolids (sewage sludge), compost, digestate and Water can also carry soil particles that hold nutrients.
Nitrate Vulnerable Zone (NVZ) waste-derived materials.
Areas designated by Defra as being at risk from Sand agricultural nitrate pollution. Organic soil Soil mineral particles larger than 0.05 mm.
Soil containing between 10% and 20% organic matter (in this guide). Elsewhere, it sometimes refers to soils with between 6% and 20% organic matter.
GGlloosaarryy 41


---
Silt Soil type Soil mineral particles in the 0.002–0.05 mm Description based on soil texture, depth, chalk diameter range. content and organic matter content.
Slurry Solid manure Excreta of livestock (other than poultry), including any Organic manure which can be stacked in a bedding, rainwater and washings mixed with it, which free-standing heap without slumping.
can be pumped or discharged by gravity. The liquid fraction of separated slurry is also defined as slurry. Target Soil Index Lowest Soil P or K Index at which there is a high SNS Index probability that crop yield will not be limited by Soil nitrogen supply expressed in seven bands or phosphorus or potassium supply. See Soil Index Indices, each associated with a range in kg N/ha. (P, K or Mg).
Soil Index (P, K or Mg) Tillage land Concentration of available P, K or Mg, as determined Land that is not being used for grass production by standard analytical methods, expressed in bands and is sown with a crop.
or Indices.
Trace element Soil mineral nitrogen (SMN) See Micronutrient.
Ammonium and nitrate nitrogen, measured by the standard analytical method and expressed in kg N/ha. Volatilisation Loss of nitrogen as ammonia from the soil to Soil nitrogen supply (SNS) the atmosphere.
The amount of nitrogen (kg N/ha) in the soil that becomes available for uptake by the crop in the Water-soluble phosphate growing season, taking account of nitrogen losses. Phosphate, expressed as P2O5, that is measured by the statutory method for fertiliser analysis.
Soil organic matter Not necessarily a measure of available phosphate – Complex, variable fraction of the soil that consists high water-solubility indicates high availability, but low of living, or once-living, materials within, or added water-solubility does not necessarily indicate to, the soil. These organic compounds, in various low availability.
stages of breakdown (decomposition), range from undecomposed plant and animal tissues, to fairly stable Weathering brown or black material with no trace of the anatomical Breakdown of soil mineral particles by physical structure of the material from which it was derived. or chemical processes. Enhanced by variation in temperature and moisture. A significant mechanism Soil texture for release of potassium from clay minerals.
Description based on the proportions of sand, silt and clay in the soil.
42


---
Notes Notes 43


---
Acknowledgements Funding for the production of this section of the Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) is provided Livestock Technical Working Group:
by AHDB. Agrisearch, AHDB, AIC, British Grassland Society, British Society of Plant Breeders, Bunn Fertiliser Ltd, Revision of the Fertiliser Manual (RB209) to create the Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) Catchment Sensitive Farming, C F Fertilisers UK Ltd, Creedy Associates, DAERA, Defra, FACTS, Frontier has been overseen by the UK Partnership for Crop Nutrient Management, which is led by AHDB. Agriculture Ltd, George Fisher (Independent Consultant), ICL Fertilisers, Mike Slater (Independent Consultant), HCC (Meat Promotion Wales), Potash Development Association, Scottish Government, AHDB wishes to thank all those who freely give their time to serve on the Steering Group, as well Teagasc, Welsh Government, and Yara UK Ltd.
as the Arable, Horticulture and Livestock Technical Working Groups. AHDB also wishes to thank the numerous farmers and growers across the country who host trials, and partner organisations that Steering Group:
have funded the research. AHDB, Agricultural Industries Confederation, Agricultural Lime Association (ALA), Association of Independent Crop Consultants, BBRO, Catchment Sensitive Farming, DAERA, Defra, FACTS, NFU, Arable Technical Working Group:
PGRO, Professional Nutrient Management Group, Scottish Government and Welsh Government.
Agrii, Agricultural Lime Association (ALA), AHDB, AIC, BBRO, Bunn Fertiliser Ltd, C F Fertilisers UK Ltd, Catchment Sensitive Farming, Compass Agronomy, Cropwell, DAERA, Defra, FACTS, Frontier Agriculture Research providers:
Ltd, H. L. Hutchinson Ltd, ICL Fertilisers, iSoils, John Clarke Agronomy, K+S UK & Eire Ltd, Limex, OMEX The revision of this section of the Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) was carried out by ADAS, ALA, Agriculture Ltd, Omya UK Ltd., PepsiCo International, PGRO, Potash Development Association, Scottish Bangor University, Ecopt, Frontier Agriculture, Lancaster University, NIAB TAG, Reading Agricultural Government, Teagasc, Velcourt Ltd, Welsh Government, and Yara UK Ltd. Consultants, Rothamsted Research, SOYL, SRUC, and the University of Southampton.
Horticulture Technical Working Group: Nutrient Management Guide (RB209) contains public sector information licensed under the Open Agrii, Agricultural Lime Association (ALA), Agrovista, AHDB, Bord na Mona, Bulrush, DARD, Defra, Government Licence (OGL) v3.0 Engage Agro, FACTS, Freshgro, Hortifeeds, H. L. Hutchinson Ltd, ICL group, J&A Growers, Lucozade nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3 Ribena Suntory, New Forest Fruits, OMEX Agriculture Ltd, PGRO, Omya UK Ltd., Scottish Government, Sinclair Pro, STRI, Teagasc, and Welsh Government.
Produced for you by: For specific AHDB Nutrient Management AHDB is a statutory levy board funded by farmers and others in the supply chain. Our purpose is to be a Guide (RB209) enquiries: critical enabler, to positively influence outcomes, allowing farmers and others in the supply chain to be AHDB AHDB is a csotamtupteotrityiv lee,v ys ubcocaersds ffuunl adnedd sbhya fraer mgoeorsd apnrda cottichee.r sW ien ethqeu ispu plepvlyy pcahyaeinrs. Owuitrh p euarspyo-steo - use products, tools E nutrient.management@ahdb.org.uk is to be a carnitdic asel ervnicaebsle tr,o t ohe plpo sthitievmel ym inaflkuee innfcoer mouetdc odmeceiss,io anllso wanindg i mfaprmroevres baunsdi noetshse rpse irnfo trhme ance. Established in Siskin Parkway East supply cha2in0 0to8 baned c ocmlaspseitfiietidve a, ss uac Ncoesns-Dfuel paanrdtm sheanrtea l gPouobdli cp rBaocdticy,e A. WHDe Be qsuuip loevrtys pthaey eforsll owwitihn g industries: meat Middlemarch Business Park To order printed publications: easy-to-usaen pdr olivdeuscttosc, kto (oBlese af,n Lda smebrv iacneds Ptoo rhke) lpin tEhnegmla mnda;k De ainirfyo rinm Gedre daet cBisriitoanins; aanndd iCmeprreoavles and Oilseeds in the Coventry T 0247 799 0069 business pUeKrfo. Frmora nfucreth. eErs itnafbolrismhaetdio inn v2i0si0t 8a handdb .colrags.suifiked as a Non-Departmental Public Body, CV3 4PE E publications@ahdb.org.uk AHDB supports the following industries: meat and livestock (Beef, Lamb and Pork) in England; Dairy in Great Britain; and Cereals and Oilseeds in the UK. For further information visit ahdb.org.uk While the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board seeks to ensure that the information contained T 024 7669 2051 If you no longer wish to receive this information, within this document is accurate at the time of printing, no warranty is given in respect thereof and, to the E comms@ahdb.org.uk please email us on comms@ahdb.org.uk While the A m g a ri x c i u m lt u u m re e a x n t d en H t o p r e ti r c m u i l t t t u e r d e b D y e v la e w lo , p th m e e A nt g B ric o u a l r t d u r s e e a e n k d s t H o o e rt n ic s u u l r t e u r t e h a D t e t v h e e l o in p f m or e m n a t t B io o n a rd accepts no contained within this document is accurate at the time of printing, no warranty is given in respect W ahdb.org.uk liability for loss, damage or injury howsoever caused (including that caused by negligence) or suffered thereof and, to the maximum extent permitted by law, the Agriculture and Horticulture directly or indirectly in relation to information and opinions contained in or omitted from this document.
Development Board accepts no liability for loss, damage or injury howsoever caused (including that caused by negligence) or suffered directly or indirectly in relation to information and opinions contained ©in Aogr roicmuiltuerde farnodm H thoirst idcuolctuurme eDnet.velopment Board 2023. All rights reserved.
70059 0624 00000000000000 © Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board 2023. All rights reserved.


---
