# HGCA_Grain_Storage_Guide.pdf

HGCA Grain storage guide HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds Third edition


---
The value of good grain Introduction Economics of grain storage Safe, effective grain storage is key to assuring crop quality and The key economic benefit of grain storage is not having to helping prevent loss of premiums through claims and sell grain for harvest movement, as later delivery usually rejections. attracts a higher price. Typically, selling feed wheat for November movement will attract a £4/tonne premium over HGCA's Grain storage guide was first published in 1999 and the harvest price, with May movement giving a further has become a key reference for most assurance schemes. This £7/tonne.
third edition of the guide is the output of a five-year Defra and industry-funded LINK research project to review the previous Understanding the costs involved is important: consider guide and ensure the recommendations remain robust. build/rental costs and the opportunity/finance costs of capital tied up in stored grain and crop conditioning costs.
Good storage practice minimises risk throughout the supply With volatile markets the risk is that unpriced grain could be worth less when it comes out of the store than it was going chain and safeguards food safety for consumers. The Hazard in, when associated costs are taken into account.
Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) system is now an integral part of the food and feed industry approach to Storage in changing conditions controlling food-borne safety issues and it is a legal requirement for all food businesses after primary production. One of the aims of the five-year research project was to challenge the recommendations of the previous editions of As most UK grain enters the human food chain, either as food, the HGCA Grain storage guide in light of the new challenges for grain storage.
drink or animal feed, adopting a HACCP-based approach to grain storage ensures growers are aligning their businesses –Grain cooling and climate change with the rest of the supply chain on this critical issue. Recent research has examined how cooling strategies may be affected in the future as a result of climate This guide combines the information from the previous edition change. The research concluded that the predicted rise in and the results of the five-year research project in a new risk temperatures due to climate change will make achieving management approach to grain storage based on HACCP the cooling targets more difficult in the future, although it principles. will still be possible to reach the target temperature. See pages 20-21.
This guide has been endorsed by, among others, AIC, NFU, –Insecticide resistance nabim and MAGB.
Populations of certain pest insects and mites have developed resistance to some currently approved Members of the LINK project consortium:
pesticides. Consideration should be given to preventing the development of resistance when applying pesticides.
This includes ensuring correct application at the manufacturer’s recommended rate and consideration of the use of a product containing an active substance with a different mode of action (MOA) to that used previously.
Further information on the classification of insecticide MOAs is available from the UK Insecticide Resistance Action Group (w.pesticides.gov.uk/rags_home.asp).
–Integrated pest management The key to safe storage of grain is an integrated pest Commercial grain is commonly traded at moisture contents management (IPM) approach. IPM approaches combine of 15% and above. The food safety risk is partly dependent different management strategies and practices to limit on temperature but begins to increase above 14.5% pest damage by the most economical means possible and moisture content. The impact of any particular temperature with the least environmental impact. As such, the use of and moisture content combination can be assessed chemical pesticides is minimised. Monitoring, prevention using the HGCA safe storage time calculator and control are integral parts of an IPM approach. See w.hgca.com/grainstorage page 22.
2 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds


---
storage 3 The value of good grain storage Contents Benefits of a HACCP-based Page approach to grain storage How to use this guide 4 – Assures grain quality through best practice For each stage in the grain storage process, the key – Prioritises resources by identifying higher risk areas hazards are identified and appropriate preventative, – Minimises risk throughout the supply chain monitoring and control measures are suggested.
– Helps meet relevant customer and legal requirements The main causes of spoilage 6 The biggest causes of spoilage in stored grain are fungi, insects and mites. Under certain conditions some storage Other related fungi can produce mycotoxins, such as ochratoxin A.
HGCA Store preparation 8 information Cleaning alone will not eliminate all pests in empty stores nor will pesticide treatment. Good store preparation works in conjunction with reaching and maintaining the All available online at target temperature and moisture content to ensure safe w.hgca.com/ grain storage.
grainstorage Hazard Analysis Table p9 Temporary holding 12 Insects and mites in Drying of grain that is at or above 18% moisture content stored grain and grain should commence immediately. Use the HGCA safe stores poster storage time calculator to Hazard Analysis Table p13 prioritise grain for drying.
Grain drying 14 Reaching the target moisture content within the shortest possible time is necessary to prevent the risk of mycotoxin formation and Hazard Analysis Table p15 quality degradation.
Long-term storage 18 Grain temperatures above 15˚C and moisture contents above 14.5% increase the risk of insect and mite Grain moisture – Grain sampling – populations developing. Cooling permits grain to be guidelines for a farmer’s guide stored at slightly higher moisture contents and measurement effectively increases the safe Hazard Analysis Table p19 storage time.
Dispatch 23 Throughout the dispatch and transportation process it is important the premises, equipment and transportation vehicles remain Hazard Analysis Table p23 as clean as possible.
Pest identification 24 Correct identification of insects and mites found in store is important. Field insects may be found in the grain Rodent control in Grain sampling from shortly after harvest but these will die out in the store.
agriculture – a guide field to buyer – understanding variation Further information 26


---
How to use this guide The grain storage process The grain storage process, as described in this Store guide, includes both grain that is produced and preparation stored on farm and storage of grain from different Pages farms in central stores. 8-11 The grain storage process has been divided into a Farm Temporary Central number of steps which represent typical grain store holding store storage operations, a step being a point, operation intake intake or stage in the process. Pages 12-13 The key steps as defined for this guide are depicted opposite; individual operations may differ. Grain drying Pages 14-17 Long term A risk-based approach storage – Cooling What is HACCP?
– Monitoring – A system of food safety assurance based on the –Treatment Pages prevention of food and feed safety problems 18-22 – Adopted by the food and feed industry as the most effective means of controlling food-borne Dispatch safety issues Page 23 – Can be used at all stages of the food/feed supply chain from primary production to final product use – Helps meet market place demands and expectations for safe food and feed The legal requirement for HACCP in the EU applies to food HACCP involves the identification and analysis of hazards businesses at any point after primary production. Central associated with all stages in a production operation. The grain storage operations are food businesses after primary significance of hazards may be determined by quantifying risk.
production and are therefore required to implement Critical Control Points (CCPs) are identified and appropriate procedures based on HACCP principles. The legal preventative measures put in place to prevent the occurrence requirement for HACCP also applies to animal feed and of the hazard. Monitoring procedures for these control therefore to crops intended for feed. measures are designated with appropriate corrective actions.
In practical terms this means that HACCP is not required for The HACCP system also requires that hazard identification is normal on-farm crop production activities, including grain correct and that control measures are suitable and can be storage. The principles of HACCP are, however, still effectively managed. The good practice, as defined in this advantageous for determining risk and have been used in guide, will help provide evidence that a grain store HACCP is this guide. technically correct.
4 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds


---
5 How to use this guide Terms used in this guide Hazard: Corrective action:
A biological, chemical or physical Any action to be taken agent in food or feed with the potential to cause when the results of monitoring indicate a loss of an adverse health effect. Examples in grain control or trend towards loss of control, hence, include Salmonella (biological), pesticide residues increased risk. The corrective action should (chemical) and glass (physical). include consideration of how to regain control and what to do with potentially unsafe product.
Hazard analysis:
The process of collecting and evaluating information on the Risk:
A factor determined by multiplying the presence of hazards in order to decide which are likelihood and the severity of the hazard in the significant and should be addressed in the absence of preventative control measures.
HACCP plan. The significance of hazards in this guide has been determined by a numerical Each hazard in this guide was scored for assessment of the risk.
likelihood and severity and the overall significance of the hazard converted into a high risk H , Preventative measure: medium risk HH or low risk H rating. A high Any action or risk rating represents a significant food safety activity that can be used to prevent or eliminate a hazard and CCP.
food safety hazard or reduce it to an acceptable level (also referred to as a 'control measure').
Critical Control Point (CCP):
Monitoring procedure: CCP A planned A process step at which control can be sequence of observations or measurements of applied and that is essential to prevent or preventative measures. The records of monitoring eliminate a food safety hazard or reduce it to an provide evidence that the control is effective (also acceptable level. If the controls fail at this point referred to as 'checking procedures'). food safety risk is increased.
HACCP (Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point):
A system which identifies, evaluates and controls hazards significant for food and feed safety.
For a more detailed guide to HACCP, see w.hgca.com/grainstorage


---
The main causes of spoi The principal causes of spoilage in stored grain are fungi, insects and mites. The fungi and insects that are found in the field are different to those that cause problems in the storage environment. Recent research has shown some stored product insects and mites are able to carry fungal spores, including those of Penicillium verrucosum , which can produce ochratoxin A.
Fungi and mycotoxins Storage fungi can grow on cereals from about 14.5% moisture content (mc) (7.5-8% mc in oilseed rape) upwards and can cause heating and loss of germinative capacity.
Temperature (˚C) A – Aspergillusspecies which may damage -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 germination and 25 cause slow heating.
B – Penicilliumspecies, C including those that produce mycotoxins.
D C – Advanced decay/field 20 fungi, eg Fusarium B species and heating organisms, eg Absidiaspecies which may be pathogenic causing, A for instance, 15 farmers' lung.
D – Thermophilic fungi, which thrive at very high temperatures, such as those that 10 occur in compost bins.
The main fungus with the potential to cause problems in stored grain in the UK is Penicillium verrucosum. Under appropriate conditions (18% mc and above) this fungus can produce the mycotoxin, ochratoxin A (OTA). EU regulations set permissible levels for OTA at 5 parts per billion (ppb) for cereals at intake. Where grain is stored above 18% mc, these levels can be exceeded in two weeks if the temperature is sufficiently high.
The principal method by which storage fungi can be controlled is through drying and cooling.
No storage fungi will grow below 14.5% mc. They continue to grow slowly at near 0°C, so cooling alone is not sufficient to prevent growth in damp grain. However, the lower the temperature, the slower the rate of growth.
Chemical treatment to prevent fungal growth can only be used on grain for animal feed.
6 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds )%( tnetnoc erutsiom etamixorppA Mycotoxins formed before harvest, for example by Fusariumspecies, are stable and likely to remain during storage but not increase. See w.hgca.com/mycotoxinsfor the fusarium mycotoxin risk assessment.
Different types of fungi thrive at different moisture contents and temperatures in stored grain Mites Storage mites are very small (<0.5mm long) and breed Barle rapidly under favourable conditions. However, they are Wheat prone to water loss and die at low relative humidity Oilseed rape (rh). Most species do not breed below 65% rh.
A Numbers at the surface may decline naturally if the surface moisture content falls below 65% relative humidity in the spring.
Mites can cause direct damage to the grain by eating the germ or hollowing out oilseeds and may also cause taint. They are strongly allergenic, although allergic reactions are generally only seen when in contact with very large populations of mites. Predatory mites may also be present where there are large populations of storage mites.
Physical control methods are used for the control of mites.If grain is dried to 14.5% mc mites are unable to breed. Cooling the grain to 5°C also prevents a build up of mites.
While this protects the grain bulk, in the winter months the mc of the surface layer of the grain may increase and mites can become a problem in Do not sniff mouldy this surface layer.
grain - spores can Chemical methods (see page 22) can also be used cause "farmers' lung".
to control mites but resistance to common residual insecticides is widespread and could lead to control failures.
Mites pose the biggest threat to oilseed rape. Oilseed rape is less susceptible to insect attack than cereals.


---
lage 7 The main causes of spoilage Insects Stored product insects are specialised for the grain storage The other species develop outside of the grain itself and environment and can breed at relatively low temperatures generally require the presence of broken grains to and moisture contents. Even a single insect in a 1kg sample survive.
may represent a potentially serious infestation.
There may be a succession of insect infestations within a Primary storage pestscan survive on grain residues from store. Weevils breed at relatively low temperatures. When the previous harvest and will then infest new grain as it is left unmanaged, this can cause ‘hotspots’ where activity placed into the store. Good store hygiene is, therefore, an of the last larval stage can raise grain temperature locally important first step in eliminating insect presence and and damage grain allowing saw-toothed grain beetles to infestation problems. breed. Further temperature increases encourage rust-red grain beetles. Mould-feeding beetles, mites and booklice Secondary insect pestssuch as the foreign grain beetle, may follow as moisture content increases.
spider beetles and booklice only damage poorly conditioned grain and are primarily fungus feeders. Good hygiene is, Correct identification of insects found is important.
again, the key to their prevention. Both the building structure and the stored grain should be monitored for insect presence using traps A range of species infest grain stored in the UK, the two wherever possible. Traps should be positioned 4-5 principal primary species being the saw-toothed grain metres apart.
beetle, Oryzaephilus surinamensis, and the grain weevil, Sitophilus granarius. Traps within the grain bulk should be positioned both on the surface and approx. 5-10cm below the surface The grain weevildevelops inside the grain, making early to monitor for insect species with different detection difficult. The larva hollows out the inside of the behaviours.
grain as it feeds and eventually emerges as an adult.
Examples of physical, biological and chemical hazards † Exceeding Statutory Maximum Residue Levels (MRL)/Permissable Levels



| Type of hazard   | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Examples                                                                                                                                                   |
|:-----------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Biological       | Pathogenic micro-organisms that may cause infection or food poisoning in consumers. Contamination of grain may be from people, equipment, store fabric or environment (eg pests, previous uses, including housing of livestock, adjacent operations). | E. coli, Salmonella                                                                                                                                        |
| Chemical         | Residues of chemical substances that may render the product unacceptable or illegal where statutory maximum residue levels (MRLs) have been exceeded.                                                                                                 | Residues of pesticides†, mineral oils, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), cleaning agents                                                            |
|                  | Residues of mycotoxins formed as a result of growth of fungal moulds in stored grain.                                                                                                                                                                 | Ochratoxin A (OTA)†                                                                                                                                        |
| Physical         | Foreign bodies that may contaminate grain. These may cause harm to the consumer or make the grain unacceptable to the customer.                                                                                                                       | Glass, metal (eg nuts and bolts), stones, brick and concrete, wood, animal contaminants (eg rodent or bird faeces), shotgun cartridges, lead, clay pigeons |
|                  | Foreign materials (allergens) that may contaminate grain from products stored previously or nearby and cause an allergic reaction in susceptible consumers.                                                                                           | Soybeans, nuts, peanuts                                                                                                                                    |
|                  | Storage pests that may contaminate grain and increase in store and make the grain unacceptable to the customer.                                                                                                                                       | Insects and mites                                                                                                                                          |


---
Store preparation Store preparation is a key stage in ensuring safe grain storage, whether the grain is to be held for a temporary period or for longer. Combining different management strategies and practices to limit pest damage by the most economical means possible and with the least environmental impact, will enable the use of chemical pesticides to be minimised.
Cleaning alone will not eliminate all pests in empty stores nor will pesticide treatment. Good store preparation works in conjunction with reaching and maintaining the target temperature and moisture content to ensure safe grain storage.
Store hygiene Campaign for Responsible Store hygiene is important for eliminating Conveyor systems have been shown to Rodenticide Use sources of contamination from storage harbour appreciable amounts of the – Always have a planned approach fungi, insects and mites. Stored product storage fungus, Penicillium – Always record quantity of bait and insects and mites are most likely to be verrucosum, in comparison to other where it is placed introduced from the store structure and areas of the store. This fungus can – Always use enough baiting points equipment. produce the mycotoxinochratoxin A – Always collect and dispose of (OTA)under appropriate conditions. To rodent bodies Primary insect pests can be present in minimise the risk, particular attention is – Never leave bait exposed to nonempty stores – even small quantities needed to remove debris and thoroughly target animals and birds of grain from previously stored crops clean machinery (including combine – Never fail to inspect bait regularly can provide a food source. harvesters, conveyor systems etc) and – Never leave bait down at the end of harder-to-reach areas of the store, while the treatment Stores should be thoroughly cleaned maintaining safe working practices.
prior to intake. Use an industrial vacuum cleaner to remove debris. Ensure that rubbish, including vacuum cleaner contents, is removed immediately after w.thinkwildlife.org.uk cleaning and is disposed of well away from the store.
Rodent control Always use secure, commercially Monitoring Treatment approved bait boxes and ensure that vermin bait cannot contaminate Place insect traps in corners and at Products currently approved for use in stored grain. Place bait boxes wall/floor junctions every 4-5 metres the UK either as structural treatments or outside the store not inside, to avoid around the store and check them treatments of grain can be found on the encouraging vermin to enter the weekly. If stored product insects or Chemicals Regulation Directorate (CRD) store.
mites are found, place additional traps to website w.pesticides.gov.uk pinpoint the source of the infestation and For more use additional hygiene measures to When using any chemical treatment information on eliminate the source. If pests are it is imperative that appropriate rodent control, persistent or widespread, consider safety measures are taken and that see HGCA's applying an approved pesticide to the correct personal protective guide.
fabric of the building. Replace traps two equipment (PPE) is worn.
days after treatment to monitor efficacy.
8 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds


---
9 Store preparation Key features of a good grain store 3 3 Clean Proofed against rodent and During cleaning, 3 Dry bird entry loading and unloading 3 Well-ventilated 3 Watertight roof (no leaks or adequate personal 3 broken guttering) Shatter-proof covers for lights and protective equipment 3 shatter-resistant bulbs No physical contaminants (PPE) should be worn.
3 3 Correctly functioning equipment Secure Key hazards and the preventative measures to be taken HACCP risk rating high risk H medium risk HH low risk H



| Hazards                                              | Risk score   | Preventative measures                                       | Monitoring procedure                   | Corrective action                                                              |
|:-----------------------------------------------------|:-------------|:------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Presence of fungi with potential to cause mycotoxins | HH           | Clean equipment and store                                   | Visual inspection of cleanliness       | Targeted cleaning                                                              |
| Presence of insects and mites                        | HH           | Clean equipment and store and monitor                       | Monitor using traps                    | Apply pesticide at recommended rate if insects and/or mites are found          |
| Presence of pesticide residues                       | H            | Use approved products in recommended manner                 | Check records of pesticide application | Review applications and practices                                              |
| Presence of rodents and rodent faeces                | H            | Clean store, remove potential harbourages and prevent entry | Check for rodent presence              | Application of rodenticides in approved manner; targeted cleaning and proofing |
| Presence of birds and bird faeces                    | H            | Clean store and prevent entry                               | Check for bird presence                | Targeted cleaning and proofing                                                 |
| Introduction of glass                                | H            | Glass control procedures                                    | Check for compliance with procedures   | Remove and replace or protect glass                                            |


---
Store preparation Pre-harvest store preparation 3 Check and repair leaks in the roof, broken guttering and Is the store weatherproof? other areas of potential ingress, protect external fans to prevent direct water ingress.
3 Is the store proofed against Check doors are well sealed and refer to HGCA’s rodent entry? Rodent control in agriculture – a guide (2002).
3 Ensure there will be adequate space above grain for Is the store well ventilated?
ventilation.
3 Is the store thoroughly Remove all grain debris from the store and equipment and cleaned? dispose of well away from the store.
! Disinfect with an appropriate food-approved disinfectant/ Has the store previously sanitiser and leave to housed livestock?
The cleaning products and dry before storing grain.
previous store use may depend on supply chain restrictions and the ultimate use of the grain – check for approval and suitability before use.
Monitoring and treatment – After cleaning, the presence of insect – Application of a residual insecticide by pests should be monitored using traps, trained personnel will provide such as the PC floor trap or the bait protection over a prolonged period, bag, positioned in corners and at dependent on the type of surface and wall/floor junctions every 4-5 metres the temperature around the store – The efficacy of the treatment can be – Where an infestation is detected, monitored by replacing traps two days Floor trap placement of additional traps will help after treatment pinpoint the source – Details of all treatments should be – Further hygiene measures at the documented infestation source may help eliminate the problem but if insect presence is persistent or widespread, consider applying an approved pesticide to the Ensure that insect bait traps do fabric of the building at the not contain allergens eg nuts.
manufacturer’s recommended rate PC trap 10 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds


---




|    |                   |
|:---|:------------------|
|    | Store preparation |
| 11 |                   |


---
Temporary holding If there are backlogs after harvest and newly-harvested grain needs to be stored temporarily prior to drying, the grain could become contaminated by fungi, insects or mites if not handled correctly. Insect traps should be used in this area both prior to and during the temporary holding.
Under certain conditions of temperature and moisture content, fungal growth may occur rapidly and may lead to the production of the mycotoxin ochratoxin A (OTA). Fungal growth and insect and mite development can be reduced at lower temperatures and moisture contents.
Prepare the area as outlined in pages 8-11 Priority Determine moisture content and temperature of grain immediately after harvesting Equipment used to measure the At or above Below temperature and moisture content should 18% mc be accurate, with moisture meters 18% mc calibrated annually, see pages 14-15 Commence drying Use HGCA safe storage time calculator to immediately to dry prioritise grain for drying to below 18% mc w.hgca.com/grainstorage This may be possible using ambient air Consider cooling grain to 15°C to prevent and use of temporary ducts, pedestals the crop from heating up and to prolong or, for small bulks, a cooling spear; the safe storage time before drying use of grain stirrers could also be considered, see pages 16-17 Dry grain within storage time indicated to 14.5% mc NB. The times indicated by the calculator commence immediately after harvest and not once grain is put into the store – times indicate a safe storage period not an immediate risk Oilseeds should be dried to 7.5-8% mc as soon as possible " below 18% mc Drying grain within the shortest possible time prevent the risk is necessary to of mycotoxin formation " 12 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds


---
13 Temporary holding Key hazards and the preventative measures to be taken HACCP risk rating high risk H medium risk HH low risk H Critical A process step at which control can be applied and that is essential to CCP Control prevent or eliminate a food safety hazard or reduce it to an acceptable Point level. If controls fail at this point food safety risk is increased.
Sampling For more information see HGCA’s Grain sampling – Take at least one sample from each trailer load for a farmer’s guide determination of moisture content (mc).
An assessment If it is not possible to collect a sample during tipping, samples of the safety of should be taken from the tipped pile using a spear sampler.
personnel during sample collection Also collect a composite sample and determine moisture must be made.
content and temperature to aid decisions on the need and priority of different batches to be made.



| Hazards                                                  | Risk score   | Preventative measures                                                    | Monitoring procedure                                                                        | Corrective action                                                                             |
|:---------------------------------------------------------|:-------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Production of ochratoxin A                               | HHH CCP      | Commence drying of grain above 18% mc immediately; dry grain to 14.5% mc | Measure temperature and moisture content and refer to the HGCA safe storage time calculator | Investigate any significant changes in moisture content; review practices and grain condition |
| Introduction of fungi with potential to cause mycotoxins | HH           | Clean equipment and store area                                           | Inspect for presence of mouldy grains                                                       | Dry grain to 14.5% mc; commence drying of grain above 18% mc immediately                      |
| Introduction of insects and mites from store fabric      | HH           | Clean area and equipment                                                 | Monitor insect/mite presence using traps                                                    | Consider need for pesticide treatment if pest insects and/or mites are found                  |
| Growth and development of insects and mites              | H            | Cool and dry to recommended levels                                       | Monitor insect/mite presence using traps; measure temperature and moisture content          | Investigate any significant changes in moisture content; review practices and grain condition |


---
Grain drying – Ensuring equipment is properly cleaned prior to use will help prevent contamination with fungal spores, insects or mites – If stored product pests are found during grain cleaning and handling, consider the need for appropriate treatment – Admixture treatments should only be made using currently approved pesticides at the manufacturer’s recommended rate and recognising any limitations by subsequent users – Ensure that the correct rate is applied by servicing and calibrating application equipment Moisture Moisture management is vital to prevent spoilage by fungi and mites.
Grain at or Commence drying 14.5% mc Dry within Below above 18% mc immediately (cereals) safe time 18% mc The safe time to achieve the recommended moisture content will The HGCA safe storage time calculator will depend on the grain temperature: a combination of high moisture help to identify grain in most urgent need of content and high temperature results in a greater risk of fungal attention w.hgca.com/grainstorage development and mycotoxin formation. The grain surface absorbs moisture in winter. Even when bulk mc is low, increases in surface Moisture measurement mc can lead to very high mite populations.
Moisture measurements can be indirect or direct. In the standard direct method (ISO/BSI 'Oven method') For a given moisture content, grain is safer to store at a lower a known weight of ground grain is dried at 130˚C until temperature. This is because the grain exchanges water with the dry matter weight remains constant. Grinding and surrounding air and, in enclosed spaces, this continues until a balance temperature control are both critical.
(the equilibrium relative humidiy, erh) is reached. As the temperature decreases, so does the erh. Moisture meters measure moisture content indirectly using either grain resistance or capacitance. They are less accurate than the standard direct method and annual calibration is essential.
An HGCA-funded project to look at moisture measurement showed that at 18% or above meters tended to under-read by as much as 1%.
Greater variability was seen with freshly-harvested grain than with grain stored for some time. Repeat testing of the sample gave meter readings within Cereals and oilseeds ±0.3%, so taking sufficient sub-samples to achieve a have different representative composite sample is important. relationships between Allowing a safety margin is advised. Errors are moisture content and frequently ±0.5% and can be greater in very wet, equilibrium relative very dry or freshly harvested grain.
humidity, hence the recommendations for Take as many samples as possible and determine the target moisture moisture content without delay. Keep samples in a content are different. watertight container with minimum free air space and at an even air temperature. Mix each sample thoroughly before testing.
14 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds 25 20 15 10 5 0 0 20 40 60 80 100 Relative humidity (%) )sisab thgiew tew %( tnetnoc erutsioM Oilseeds should be dried to 7.5-8% mc as soon as possible Mould growth and mite reproduction stop below 65% erh.
Barley Wheat Oilseed rape All at 15˚C



| Moisture content   | Wheat temperature   |         |         |
|:-------------------|:--------------------|:--------|:--------|
|                    | 5ºC                 | 15ºC    | 25ºC    |
| 16.5% mc           | 68% erh             | 74% erh | 76% erh |
| 15.5% mc           | 62% erh             | 69% erh | 71% erh |
| 14.5% mc           | 56% erh             | 64% erh | 66% erh |
| 13.5% mc           | 49% erh             | 58% erh | 60% erh |


---
15 Grain drying Key hazards and the preventative measures to be taken For more information see HACCP risk rating high risk H medium risk HH low risk H HGCA’s Grain moisture – guidelines for measurement.
A process step at which control can be applied and that Critical is essential to prevent or eliminate a food safety hazard CCP Control or reduce it to an acceptable level. If controls fail at this Point point food safety risk is increased.
The HGCA weight loss during grain drying calculator will calculate the weight loss from the drying process based on the initial and final moisture readings from a sample of grain w.hgca.com/grainstorage



| Hazards                                                             | Risk score   | Preventative measures                                                                                                      | Monitoring procedure                     | Corrective action                                                                             |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Production of ochratoxin A                                          | HHH CCP      | Commence drying of grain above 18% mc immediately; dry grain to 14.5% mc                                                   | Measure temperature and moisture content | Investigate any significant changes in moisture content; review practices and grain condition |
| Introduction of fungi during grain cleaning                         | HH           | Clean area and equipment                                                                                                   | Visually inspect for mouldy grains       | Dry grain to 14.5% mc; commence drying of grain above 18% mc immediately                      |
| Pesticides exceed maximum residue levels due to incorrect admixture | HH           | Use only approved products and conform to manufacturer’s guide for use; check condition and calibration of spray equipment | Check records of pesticide application   | Review applications and practices                                                             |
| Introduction of hydrocarbons from direct fired drying systems       | HH           | Use appropriate grade oil; ensure efficient combustion and adequate ventilation                                            | Check before use                         | Remedy defects                                                                                |
| Introduction of rodent faeces during grain cleaning                 | H            | Clean store and proof to prevent ingress of rodents                                                                        | Check for presence                       | Check proofing measures; consider control options                                             |


---
Grain drying Moisture effects High temperature drying Moisture content % Method: Air heated to 40°C or higher 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 Heat can be generated from oil or gas Grain at or Below 14.5% The lowest Either batch or continuous dryers can above mc no storage acceptable be used 18% mc – fungi will grow mc for commence and mites are oilseed 6% Grain is generally moved during the drying unable to breed rape is process to limit over-drying and heat immediately (cereals) 7.5-8% damage mc for oilseed rape Capital costs: High 18% Below mc dry Speed of drying: Fast – grain is in a shallow layer with within a safe time high airflow Management Follow manufacturer’s instructions Drying skills:
There are two basic methods of drying grain – high Weather: Independent of weather conditions temperature drying and near-ambient air drying.
Drying Max of 65˚C at 20% mc, reducing by 1˚C temperatures for every 1% increase in initial mc High temperature drying uses air heated to 40°C or must be set higher and is fast and independent of the weather but carefully: For feed grain: Max of 120˚C for 1 hour has a higher capital cost.
or 100˚C for 3 hours Risks of spoilage:Low risk of slow drying Near-ambient air drying is used for bulk grain stored in bins or on-floor and works by blowing air, up to 5°C Risk of over-heated grain warmer than the grain, through the bulk. This is slower Some risk of over-drying than high temperature drying with a higher risk of Maltsters, millers and seed producers require spoilage but a lower risk of over-heated grain.
that grain temperatures should not exceed 50°C Rapeseed becomes very brittle at low mc so over- After drying, grain must be cooled to prevent drying can be a problem. Free fatty acid content breeding of insects and mites increases rapidly in broken seed and may cause oil degradation after crushing. There is little leeway between the safest mc for prolonged, stable storage (7.5-8%) and the lowest acceptable mc (6%).
Good practice requires careful drying and accurate moisture meter calibration.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) If a direct drying system uses an oil-fired energy source it It is also important to ensure there is adequate ventilation is important to avoid hydrocarbon contamination. to prevent the recirculation of burner exhaust gasses into the intake cowling which can generate a taint which can This can be achieved by ensuring that the fuel meets render the grain unsuitable for sale. An additional risk is commercial ISDN/ISO fuel standards and that there is the development of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons efficient combustion (by setting air:fuel ratios to (PAHs) if combustion is incomplete.
manufacturer’s recommendations).
16 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds Dry cereals to 14.5% Dry oilseed rape to 7.5-8%


---
Grain stirrers In most years, on-floor drying can be effective and economical but in some seasons an on-floor system will incur considerable costs and may not achieve good enough results. Grain stirrers can be used to mix the grain vertically, resulting in a mix of dry and undried layers.
An HGCA project, to be completed in 2012, is examining the potential benefits of grain stirrers with an emphasis on reducing costs and drying time.
Although in its early stages, the project has demonstrated that stirring reduces the length of time that the upper layers of the grain spend at the initial moisture content if there are sufficient stirring augers to be effective for the whole bed.
17 Grain drying Near-ambient air drying Grain depth 350 Spoilage risk increases as grain depth exceeds a fan’s 300 design maximum. Airflow will be seriously reduced and drying zone advance will be slowed. For example, if 250 grain is normally stored at 2.8m deep, this depth should be reduced by 0.5m for each percentage point increase 200 in initial grain moisture above 20%.
150 100 50 0 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 Superficial air velocity (m/s) )htped deb m/eguaG retaW mm( erusserP Method: Air, up to 5°C warmer than the grain, is blown through it; recommended airflow is 180m 3 /hr/tonne or 6357ft 3 /hr/tonne Capital costs: Low Speed of drying: Slow – typically 10 days with recommended airflows of 180m3/hr/tonne Management Need to respond to moisture skills: content and weather conditions Weather: Wet weather slows drying Initial moisture Drying capacity is reduced if initial content: moisture content is high Risks of spoilage:Higher risk of slow drying Low risk of over-heated grain Some risk of over-drying Drying occurs in a layer that develops at the air intake and then moves through the bulk – grain ahead of the drying zone remains wet and may also be warm, increasing the risk of spoilage Different seeds present different resistances to airflow so bed depth is a critical factor – check airflow is adequate by taking measurements at several points using an anemometer Grain stirrers



|      |            |
|:-----|:-----------|
| Oi   | lseed rape |
| W Ba | heat rley  |


---
Long-term storage Temperatures above 15˚C increase the risk of insect and mite populations developing. Cooling of grain should commence as soon as the grain comes into store.
Prepare the area as outlined in pages 8-11 Preparation Dry grain to 14.5% mc, dry oilseeds to 7.5-8% mc (pages 14-17) Cooling Target: within 2 weeks Target: within 3-4 Target:
of harvest months of harvest end-December Cool by low volume Cool to below 12˚C Cool to below 5˚C aeration to below 15°C to prevent grain weevils to kill surviving adult insects to prevent saw-toothed completing their life cycle and prevent mites grain beetles completing increasing their life cycle Malting barley is often not cooled to The use of differential thermostatson cooling fans at below 10°C, otherwise secondary a differential setting of 4-6˚C provides the most rapid, dormancy may be induced cost-effective and carbon-efficient cooling Weekly monitoring Monitor temperature, moisture content and traps for the presenceof insects and mites Increase in mc in a localised Insects or mites found Increase in temperature area of 2% or more in a week – Increase number of traps to – Identify cause and take – Identify cause and take determine extent of infestation, necessary action necessary action consider the need for treatment – The type of treatment may This may indicate This may indicate presence of depend on the end use of the condensation, leaks, hot spots fungi, sprouting or grain and specific restrictions or insects. development of grain weevils.
imposed by a customer further along the supply chain based on their product market If a residual pesticide Positioning insect traps both on the surface of the treatment is used, this must grain and approx. 5-10cm below the surface approx.
have approved usage for 4-5 metres apart will ensure the greatest likelihood of admixture to the grain and be detecting all species of stored product insects and applied at the manufacturer’s recommended rate. mites at the earliest opportunity 18 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds


---
19 Long-term storage Key hazards and the preventative measures to be taken HACCP risk rating high risk H medium risk HH low risk H Critical A process step at which control can be applied and that is essential to CCP Control prevent or eliminate a food safety hazard or reduce it to an acceptable Point level. If controls fail at this point food safety risk is increased.
Record keeping, either electronically or on paper, will illustrate due diligence and enable changes in grain condition to be readily identified. This can provide an early warning of potential problems.



| Hazards                                    | Risk score   | Preventative measures                                                                                                                 | Monitoring procedure                                                                       | Corrective action                                                                                                                                     |
|:-------------------------------------------|:-------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Production of ochratoxin A                 | HHH CCP      | Store grain below 14.5% mc and 5°C, except malting barley, which should not be stored below 10°C                                      | Check temperature and moisture content regularly                                           | Investigate any significant changes; review practices and grain condition                                                                             |
| Development of insect and mite populations | HHH CCP      | Store grain below 14.5% mc and 5°C, except malting barley, which should not be stored below 10°C; store oilseed at 7.5-8% mc and <5°C | Position traps and check traps correctly; check temperature and moisture content regularly | Investigate source of infestation and any significant changes in mc or temperature; review grain condition and practices; consider need for treatment |
| Introduction of pesticide residues         | HH           | Use only approved products and conform to manufacturer’s guide for use; check condition and calibration of spray equipment            | Check records of pesticide application                                                     | Review applications and practices                                                                                                                     |
| Introduction of bird and rodent faeces     | H            | Keep store clean and proof to prevent entry                                                                                           | Check for bird and rodent presence                                                         | Check proofing measures; consider control options                                                                                                     |
| Introduction of glass                      | H            | Glass control procedures                                                                                                              | Check for compliance with procedures                                                       | Remove and replace or protect                                                                                                                         |


---
Long-term storage Cooling using low volume ventilation Temperatures above 15°C increase the risk of insect and mite populations developing. Grain will be relatively warm post-harvest and is a good insulator, so heat will be lost very slowly. Cooling permits grain to be stored at slightly higher moisture contents and effectively increases the safe storage time. It will also even out or equalise temperature gradients and prevent moisture translocation.
Low volume aeration (10m3/hour/tonne or 6ft3/min/tonne) should be used to cool the grain and cooling should start as soon as ducts are covered.
Use HGCA safe storage time calculator to determine the safe storage time for individual batches or bulks Temperature effects of grain w.hgca.com/grainstorage " Temperatures fall more rapidly and to lower levels when automatic fan control " using compared to manual Differential controls Differential controls have been shown to result in more temperature. The effectiveness of differential controllers with a efficient grain cooling. A differential controller will only switch 4-6˚C differential has been demonstrated in both computer the cooling fan on when the air temperature is lower than the simulations and practical trials.
grain temperature.
This method ensures that cooling systems have the potential If blowing with cooler air using a to run whenever air of a temperature to permit cooling is differential thermostat (4-6˚C difference), available and are automatically switched off once the grain it is not possible to dampen grain.
reaches the ambient temperature. This results in a reduction in the number of fan hours to reach the target temperature in For grain to become damp from blowing, you need a comparison with manual control of the fans leading to a combination of:
reduction in energy costs. – Excessive aeration rates – Condensation around ducts in spring The ambient sensor should be placed close to the fan inlet but – Rain driven into uncovered external fans in a position where it is not affected by any heat generated – Successive days of condensing fog from the fan.
Sucking air through grain may increase natural dampening The grain probe should be placed in the region of the grain at the grain surface during winter –this front may extend bulk that is the slowest to cool and should not be placed too to 1/3 of grain depth.
close to the surface to avoid tracking of the ambient 20 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds



| Temperature ˚C 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10   |                        |               |                   |                   |                       |                                         |                                            |                                          |                                   |                                            |                    |               |                       |             |
|:-------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------|:--------------|:------------------|:------------------|:----------------------|:----------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|:----------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------|:-------------------|:--------------|:----------------------|:------------|
|                                                        |                        |               | most i breed 25-3 |                   |                       |                                         |                                            |                                          |                                   |                                            | below feed an to n |               |                       |             |
| abo inse                                               | 40°C ve , cts die with | most in a day |                   | most i breed 25-3 | nsects rapidly at 3°C |                                         | most insec breed belo grain weev reproduce | t species d 15°C w b ils can 1 slowly at |                                   | o not ut 2°C                               |                    | below feed an | 5°C insec d slowly di | ts cannot e |
|                                                        |                        |               |                   |                   |                       |                                         |                                            | mites an increase very slo 5°C in        |                                   |                                            |                    |               |                       |             |
|                                                        |                        |               |                   |                   |                       | mycotoxin formation likely betw 15°C an | is most een 25°C d                         |                                          | mites an increase very slo 5°C in | d fungi can (although wly) down moist grai | to n               |               |                       |             |


---
21 Long-term storage Grain bed depth Airflow – An important factor when determining cooling strategy – Fans need sufficient pressure to overcome resistance – If the depth is too great, cooling success may be reduced due to the crop, the depth and the duct characteristics – Ducts need to be of sufficient diameter and have Oilseed rape has a much higher sufficient perforated area to minimise resistance resistance to airflow than cereals. If – Measure using an anemometer in a measuring duct using an aeration system designed of appropriate diameter and length placed in front of for conventional cereals storage it is or after the fan necessary to reduce the bed depth – A floatmeter should not be used to measure airflow by 50-70% if storing oilseed rape.
for low volume aeration Distance between ducts and grain depth (m) This example is typical of commercial systems using a 250mm Grain depth (m) 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 diameter by 920mm high perforated metal duct served by a fan working at 70mm wg designed to cool about 95 tonnes of grain in Duct centres (m) 7.6 6.3 5.5 5.0 4.4 4.0 3.7 100 hours of ventilation. Follow suppliers’ recommendations for specific products.
Vertical aeration Upward versus downward aeration Vertical aeration systems can be just as effective as Blowing air up through grain is preferable to sucking horizontal systems. The advantages of vertical systems air down because:
are that the capital costs are lower and the risk of – Blowing improves air distribution damaging ducts during unloading in flat stores is reduced. Spacing of ducts will depend on grain depth but – ‘Problems’ rise to the surface generally placing ducts 4-8 metres apart is suitable for an – Fan heating reduces relative humidity of blown air average flat store of grain. Blowing air into the duct will – Warm, damp air is flushed from the building cool 20% more grain than sucking. Sucking air through – Cooling can start as soon as ducts are covered grain may increase dampening at the grain surface during Suction can be useful if:
winter and this dampening front may extend to one-third of the grain depth. This may increase the risk of storage – Condensation on the inside of roofs is a problem, mite infestations and storage mycotoxins, depending on although good ventilation can overcome this (NB the temperature. See HGCA Project Report 269 for suction may dampen grain surface layers) further information. – There is a risk of water entering aeration ducts – Grain depth is so great that excessive temperature Progress of grain cooling with blowing and rise would occur with blowing sucking systems after 100 hours of ventilation in a bed 3m deep (arrows indicate air-flow paths) Warm Blowing Sucking Cool


---
Long-term storage Monitoring Insects and mites – Early detection is important to prevent rising populations Temperature – Traps have been shown to be more than ten times as – Monitor every few days until target reached, weekly effective as sampling for detecting low level populations thereafter – Some traps are designed for use in the store, others for use – Always record at the same location within the grain bulk – Measurements MUST be taken where cooling takes longest eg furthest from the fan in blowing systems, – When monitoring using traps, position them both at and usually 0.5m beneath the surface and centrally between below the surface (eg a combination of probe and pitfall ducts traps, or PC traps in pairs) to target different insect species with different behaviours – Use a calibrated grain temperature probe (thermocouples or thermistors) – Lay traps out across the grain bulk in a 4-5 metre grid – Monitor weekly until grain reaches the target temperature Moisture (5°C) then monthly providing grain remains at the target temperature, until spring when temperatures rise and – Monitor at several locations (same each time) insects become more active. Revert to weekly monitoring – Record at least once each month during winter – Monitor the structure of the building – Allow a safety margin: errors are frequently ±0.5% and can be greater in very wet, very dry or freshly – Traps should be accounted for each time they are examined harvested grain and a permanent record of the contents should be kept Control measures Traps v sampling Residual insecticides – A simple relationship between actual insect numbers – Offer some protection over a prolonged period after and the quantities caught in traps cannot be accurately application determined due to complex environmental conditions – May take time to control an existing infestation and insect behaviour – Control may take longer to achieve at lower temperatures – Traps do provide an indication of population trends depending on the active ingredient – Sampling grain and subsequent examination can be used to detect insects and mites but is less reliable than Fumigants traps – No lasting activity but penetrate and disinfect static bulks – It may be appropriate to check for storage mites in the – Will control all stages of infestation in one treatment if surface layer of the grain correctly applied Diatomaceous earth (DE) Products currently approved for use in the UK either – Acts by desiccating insects and mites as structural treatments or treatments of grain can be found on the Chemicals Regulation Directorate (CRD) – Can be slow acting website w.pesticides.gov.uk. The intended use and – Not accepted by some supply chains due to health and market of the grain may determine the products that can safety concerns (dust) and the inability to remove it from the be applied.
grain, which can affect machinery: check with the buyer Apply pesticides correctly to prevent exceeding maximum residue limits. Incorrect application can contribute to pesticide resistance.
Take appropriate safety measures when using any chemical treatment and wear correct PPE.
22 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds


---
23 Long-term storage/Dispatch Dispatch Dispatch Throughout the dispatch and transportation process it is important that the premises, equipment and transportation vehicles remain as clean as possible. Grain residues in vehicles can be a source of stored product insects and mites, therefore, care should be taken to remove deposits of grain in the vehicle as soon as possible after transportation.
If taken to another storage facility then the steps previously described will be necessary.
Depending on the moisture content and temperature of the grain at dispatch, the optimal conditions for storage may be reached more quickly.
Key hazards and the preventative measures to be taken HACCP risk rating high risk H medium risk HH low risk H Grain sampling " Representative samples of Care should be taken to the grain should be taken.
The specific tests and remove deposits of measurements that need to grain be carried out on the grain in the vehicle as sample will depend on the after soon as possible end market. Further details on grain sampling can be transportation " found in HGCA's Grain sampling - a farmer's guide.



| Hazards                                     | Risk score   | Preventative measures                    | Monitoring procedure   | Corrective action   |
|:--------------------------------------------|:-------------|:-----------------------------------------|:-----------------------|:--------------------|
| Introduction of storage fungi               | H            | Clean outloading equipment and transport | Visually inspect       | Targeted cleaning   |
| Introduction of insect and mite populations | H            | Clean outloading equipment and transport | Visually inspect       | Targeted cleaning   |


---
Pest identification It is important that any pests found are correctly identified. Field insects may be found in the grain shortly after harvest but these will die out in the store.
Common primary insect pests Can increase rapidly and damage grain stored at temperatures above 15˚C.
Grain weevil Saw-toothed grain beetle Rust-red grain beetle Sitophilus Oryzaephilus Cryptolestes granarius surinamensis ferrugineus Develops inside Only develops on Penetrates grain the grain. damaged surface through minute Causes heating. of grain. cracks.
Difficult to find. Very active and Can fly in hot UK easy to trap. summers.
Other primary insect pests Occasionally found on UK grain but require high temperatures and do not overwinter well.
Rice and maize weevils Lesser grain borer Rust-red flour beetle Sitophilus Rhyzopertha Tribolium oryzae/zeamais dominica castaneum Mainly associated Eggs laid on grain Requires a high with imported surface, larvae proportion of feedstuffs.Can burrow inside to damaged grains to move into stored thrive. Frequently develop.
grain. Eggs laid found in animal inside grain. feed mills.
Secondary insect pests Cannot complete their life cycles at 14.5% moisture content or below. Feed primarily on fungi. Can invade grain stores in large numbers from outside and feed directly on grain.
Hairy fungus beetle Foreign grain beetle Fungus beetles Typhaea stercorea Ahasverus advena eg Cryptophagus Associated with Increasingly species stored straw, hay common in Frequent in and damp residues. UK. Very mobile damp, mouldy Develops inside and a common residues and can the grain.
cause of wander into Causes heating.
rejection. stored grain.
Difficult to find.
Australian spider beetle White-marked spider beetle Plaster beetle Ptinus tectus Ptinus fur Lathridiidae Seldom found in Numbers can Very small black UK grain, take years to beetles which but survives in build up. Can flourish in damp, structure of survive long mouldy residues.
warmer stores. periods in an inactive form.
24 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds


---
25 Pest identification Pest mites Normally only a problem on damper surface of dry bulk if moisture content targets are met in the rest of the bulk.
Flour miteAcarus siro Cosmopolitan food mite Grainstack miteTyrophagus longior Indicates bulk Lepidoglyphus Initial infestations moisture content destructor often occur is higher than Surface feeder during bulk recommended. usually present drying Internal feeder in low to operations.
which can build moderate Requires high up massive mc and numbers.
populations. temperature.
Predatory & other mites Large numbers indicate high temperatures and previous infestations.
Predatory mite Gamasidae Large numbers Long-legged fast indicate high movers may prey on temperatures and pest mites. Individuals previous may also be blood infestations. feeders on rodents.
Moths May be seen flying in summer. Webbing produced by larvae may clump grains together.
Mainly occur on surface of bulk, also infest and breed in debris.
Brown White-shouldered Moth larva house moth house moth Distinguished Hofmannophila Endrosis from beetle pseudospretella sarcitrella larvae by dark Often Slow to head capsule.
associated develop in old with animal grain or feed feeds. residues.
Booklice Considerable numbers may build up at grain surface, mainly Non-pest species in winter. Can be clearly seen running over storage structures.
– wingless – winged Clover weevil Require Can be found in Sitona species Other nondamper spectacular damaging conditions, numbers, species include ubiquitous especially around the ground in UK. edges of grain beetle and the bulk. Pest status narrow-necked not clear.
harvest beetle.


---
Further information HGCA information HGCA publications are freely available to download from w.hgca.com/publications Drying and Cooling HGCA Project Reports G37 Grain moisture – guidelines for measurement (2008) PR464 Food safety review of UK cereal grain for use in malting, PP13 On-floor drying to minimise grain spoilage (2006) milling and animal feed (2009) TS89 Drying and storing rapeseed successfully (2006) PR454 BulkDryRape: Interactive computer-based tool (2009) TS78 Drying and cooling grain: an update (2004) PR443 Assessing and addressing the impact of warmer autumns on TS60 Ensuring good germination in malting barley (2002) the success of grain cooling (2008) TS53 Vertical ventilation for cooling grain (2002) PR440 Validation of a model to avoid conditions favouring TS16 Bulk storage drying of grain and oilseeds (1998) Ochratoxin A production during ambient air-drying (2008) PR437 Evaluation of rapid test kits as potential screening tools for Sampling Ochratoxin A determination in wheat and barley (2008) G18 Grain sampling from field to buyer – understanding variation PR426 Research to develop practical user guidelines to maximise (2004) the accuracy of moisture meters (2008) G17 Grain sampling – a farmer’s guide (2003) PR407 Assessment of three commercial automatic grain samplers TS83 Sampling grain during outloading (2005) fitted to front loader buckets (2006) P04 Grain sampling on-farm PR399 Practical strategies for minimising the production of GSG2009 Grain sampling guidelines (2009) Ochratoxin A in damp cereals (2006) GSWV1 Grain sampling worksheet PR396 Improved detection and monitoring of beetle pests in stored grain through use of a multi-species lure (2006) Pests PR386 Monitoring contaminants in wheat grain (2006) G09 Rodent control in agriculture – a guide (2002) PR380 Review of food safety issues relating to the supply and TS79 Insect and mite control in empty grain stores using DE (2004) market acceptability of UK malting barley and UK malt (2006) TS62 Preventing and controlling mites in stored cereals (2002) PR269 Optimising the performance of vertical aeration systems TS8 Effective phosphine fumigation of grain (1998) (2002) P01 Insects and mites in stored grain and grain stores P03 Inspecting grain for defects and impurities Websites Agricultural Industries Confederation (AIC):
Fusarium mycotoxins w.agindustries.org.uk G34 Guidelines to minimise risk of fusarium mycotoxins in cereals Campaign for Responsible Rodenticide Usage:
(2010) w.thinkwildlife.org.uk TS108HGCA risk assessment for fusarium mycotoxins in wheat Food Standards Agency: w.food.gov.uk (2011) Grain and Feed Trade Association (GAFTA): w.gafta.com HGCA: w.hgca.com/grainstorage HGCA Research Reviews Insecticide Resistance Action Group (IRAG-UK):
RR42 Alternatives to organophosphorous compounds for the w.pesticides.gov.uk/rags_home.asp control of storage mites (2000) Maltsters’ Association of Great Britain: w.ukmalt.com RR38 Bulk storage drying of grain and oilseeds (1998) National Association of British and Irish Millers (nabim):
RR27 Methods of distributing phosphine in bulk grain (1994) w.nabim.org.uk RR OS6 Drying and storage of oilseed rape in the UK (1992) NFU: w.nfuonline.com Red Tractor Farm Assurance: w.assurance.redtractor.org.uk Scottish Quality Cereals (SQC): w.sfqc.co.uk The HGCA safe storage time calculator is available at w.hgca.com/grainstorage The Food and Environment Research Agency:
w.fera.defra.gov.uk 26 HGCA Grain storage guide for cereals and oilseeds


---
27 Further information Other information Legislation (w.legislation.gov.uk) EU Legislation:
The following list is not exhaustive, but highlights the key pieces - Biocidal Products Directive (98/008/EEC) of agricultural, environmental and food/feed safety legislation - Feed Hygiene Regulation (EC No. 183/2005) which must be understood and complied with:
- Food Hygiene Regulation (EC No. 852/2004) UK Acts: - General Food Hygiene Requirements (EC No. 178/2002) - Agriculture Act 1947 - EU Legislation (Directive 2007/68/EC) - Prevention of Damage by Pests Act 1949 - Directive 2003/89 Annex Ia – Food Labelling Amendment - Pests Act 1954 - Commission Regulation (EC No 466/2001) setting maximum - Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 levels for certain contaminants in foodstuffs - Control of Pollution Act 1974 - Regulation 1829/2003 EC on GM food and Feed - Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 - Regulation 1830/2003 EC on Traceability and Labelling of Feed Products Derived from GMOs - Food and Environment Protection Act 1985 (Part i) - Commission Directive 200/26/EC on sampling methods and - Food Safety Act 1990 methods of analysis for the official control of the levels of - Environmental Protection Act 1990 Ochratoxin A in foodstuffs - Wild Mammals (Protection) Act 1996 British and International Standards UK Statutory Instruments:
BS EN ISO 712:2009 Cereals and cereal products – - The Control of Pesticides Regulations 1986 (SI 1986 No. 1510) Determination or moisture content – Reference method - The Spring Traps Approval Order 1995 (SI 1995 No. 2427) BS 4317-18: 1988 Methods of test for cereals and pulses.
- The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations Determination of hidden insect infestation 1992 (SI 1992 No. 2051) BS ISO 7701-1:2008 Food products – Checking the - The Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations performance of moisture meters in use Part 1: Moisture meters 1994 (SI 1994 No. 3246) for cereals - The Food Safety (General Food Hygiene) Regulations 1995 (SI 1995 No. 1763) BS 4317-26: 1991 (ISO 4112:1990) Methods of test for cereals and pulses. Measurement of temperature of grain during bulk - The Plant Protection Products (Basic Conditions) Regulations storage 1997 (SI 1997 No. 189) - Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (No. 2) Regulations BS 6219:1996 (ISO 5223:1995) Test sieves for cereals 2006 (SI 2006 No.1228) BS6279-2:2001 (ISO 6322-2:2000) Storage of cereals and - The Feed (Hygiene and Enforcement)(England) Regulations pulses. Practical recommendations 2005 (SI 2005 No. 3280) BS EN ISO 243333:2009 Cereals and cereal products – - The Official Feed and Food Controls (England) Regulations 2006 sampling (SI 2006 No. 15) - The Feeding Stuffs (England) Regulations 2005 (SI 2005 No.
Defra Publication 3281) - The Feeding Stuffs (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2006 Code of practice for the control of Salmonelladuring the (SI 2006 No. 2808) production, storage and transport of compound feeds, premixtures, feed materials and feed additives - The Feed (Specified Undesirable Substances) (England) w.defra.gov.uk Regulations 2006 (SI 2006 No. 3120) - The Food Hygiene (England) Regulations (SI 2006 No. 14) FSA Publications - The Contaminants in Food (England) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006 Code of Good Agricultural Practice for the reduction of No. 1464) mycotoxins in UK cereals The UK Code of Good Storage Practice to Reduce Ochratoxin A in Cereals w.food.gov.uk


---
HGCA Stoneleigh Park HGCA Publications Warwickshire CV8 2TL T 0845 245 0009 w.hgca.com E hgca@cambertown.com Acknowledgements This edition, funded by HGCA, was revised by Dr Maureen HGCA is grateful to many people who have commented on Wakefield, Fera and Dr Chris Knight, Campden BRI, in draft versions of the guide, including: Anna Farrell, Steve association with the Defra LINK project consortium of Barras, Jack Watts and Jennifer Forrester, HGCA; Garry Rudd, Paul Rooke, AIC; Dean Cook, Debbie Collins and Dr Philip AIC; Mark Ryland; Sue Mattock, Chemicals Regulation Jennings, Fera; David Bruce, David Bruce Consulting Ltd; Directorate; Robin Levin, FABBL; Prof. Simon Edwards, Harper Dr Dhan Bhandari and Dr Simon Hook, HGCA; Dr John Holt Adams University College; Dr Ken Wildey, Technology for and Dr Jon Knight, Imperial College London; Prof. Rod Growth; Colin West, MAGB; Shaun Taylor, Premier Foods; as Blackshaw, University of Plymouth; Dr Nigel Davies, MAGB; well as Andrew Cragg, Julian Hasler and Martin Robinson.
Martin Savage and Catherine Lehane, nabim; Guy Gagen and Stewart Vernon, NFU; Sara Dickinson, Premier Foods/Ranks Edited by Dr Emily Boys, HGCA.
and Gary Milner, Robydome.
Design by Pinstone Communications Ltd.
The research project was sponsored by Defra through the Sustainable Arable LINK programme, with funding from AIC, Defra, HGCA, MAGB, nabim, NFU, Premier Foods/Ranks and Pest and trap photographs courtesy of The Food and Robydome. Research partners included Campden BRI, David Environment Research Agency (Fera) © Crown Copyright.
Bruce Consulting Ltd, Fera and Imperial College London.
Disclaimer While the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board, operating through its HGCA division, seeks to ensure that the information contained within this document is accurate at the time of printing no warranty is given in respect thereof and, to the maximum extent permitted by law, the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board accepts no liability for loss, damage or injury howsoever caused (including that caused by negligence) or suffered directly or indirectly in relation to information and opinions contained in or omitted from this document.
Reference herein to trade names and proprietary products without stating that they are protected does not imply that they may be regarded as unprotected and thus free for general use. No endorsement of named products is intended, nor is any criticism implied of other alternative but unnamed products.
HGCA is the cereals and oilseeds division of the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board.
Autumn 2011 Electronic version can be downloaded at w.hgca.com © Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board 2011 All rights reserved HGCA guide 52 (G52)


---
