# soil-association-a-new-era-for-organic-cereals-2022-download.pdf

A New Era for UK Organic Cereals 2022 HANDBOOK FOR ARABLE FARMERS & ADVISORS


---
CONTRIBUTORS Liz Bowles Jerry Alford Associate Director of Farming, Senior Farming Advisor, Soil Association Soil Association lbowles@soilassociation.org jalford@soilassociation.org Adrian Steele Beth Kelsey Organic Sector Development Advisor, Business Development Manager (Farming), Soil Association Soil Association Certification asteele@soilassociation.org bkelsey@soilassociation.org mraF notgnitraD :revoC Photo: Elliott Neep


---
Strong Prospects for Organic Arable Increasing numbers of farmers are considering transitioning to more regenerative practices, including organic farming. For the arable sector the continued growth in demand for organic food (4-7% annual growth since 2014) is underpinning rising demand for organic crops grown either for human consumption or livestock feed. This is coinciding with an increased imperative to source more locally, especially for the organic protein portion of diets. This report sets out the current opportunities and challenges facing organic arable farming and makes the financial case to farmers and their advisors who are considering organic production.
Demand for organic food is growing A common misconception of in the UK much faster than domestic organic production is that lower supply of organic crops. The UK is yields must equal lower profits, facing an increasing deficit of arable but Farm Business Survey annual crops for animal feedstuffs at a time benchmarking figures show this is when other countries, especially generally not the case. Lower input the USA, are increasing demand costs and increased support mean at an unprecedented rate. In 2019, that often organic farms are just as, the UK imported close to 80% of if not more, profitable than their its organic animal feedstuffs. Year- non-organic counterparts. Right on-year reliance on imported feeds now, the fact that organic farms is increasing. Current estimates are less impacted by input price suggest that at least 160,000 tonnes volatility is a significant benefit. This of organic animal feedstuffs are is because input use is restricted. The now being imported annually and organic market is certainly smaller some livestock are now routinely but innovative partnerships between wholly reliant on imported feed¹. farmers and their customers are Liz Bowles, To underpin the UK organic sector, shortening supply chains and the area of organic arable crops increasing price stability. Head of Farming, produced in the UK could easily Soil Association double to 86,000 ha. At the same time, processors and retailers are increasingly searching for UK sourced ingredients for organic food—including organic livestock feeds—to be certain of product integrity, to reduce risk of disruption to supply.
Organic farms are less impacted by input price volatility


---
Demand for Organic How the UK organic market is affecting UK farmers Against the backdrop of the pandemic, the global market for Sales of organic food showed its highest growth ever in 2020, exceeding 120 billion euros2. In the UK, the organic market has seen 10 organic are at years of positive growth, showing remarkable resilience despite their highest the supply chain disruption caused by the pandemic and Brexit.
The UK organic market continued to grow by 5.2% in 2021, with ever level shoppers spending almost £60 million on organic products every week, and is now worth over £3 billion3.
Sales of organic are at their highest Although inflationary and supply strong growth in the organic market.
ever level and are significantly chain pressures will continue be At present, approximately 2.9% of UK outperforming non-organic, as the a challenge for all farmers, the land is organic5 but more ingredients trend for sustainable and healthy organic market is a resilient one and products are being imported options has clearly ‘stuck’ with which offers opportunities for to support increased demand.
more consumers seeking climate organic farming and meets the With more robust supply chains, and nature friendly options. 70% of growing consumer need for healthy UK farmers can be supported to consumers are more concerned and sustainable food. meet growing organic demand and about health, sustainability and increase supply chain resilience.
The opportunity for UK farmers and the environment following the supply chains now is to step up to pandemic and COP26, and many meet the demand presented by the want to buy British4.
3053 2006–2021 UK sales of organic products in GBP (£) millions 2903 % 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Organic Market Report, February 2022



|      |     |       |       |       |     |       |     |     |       |       |        |    |
|:-----|:----|:------|:------|:------|:----|:------|:----|:----|:------|:------|:-------|:---|
|      |     |       |       |       |     |       |     |     |       |       | +12.6% | +  |
|      |     |       |       |       |     |       |     |     |       | +4.5% |        |    |
|      |     |       |       |       |     |       |     |     | +5.3% |       |        |    |
|      |     |       |       |       |     |       |     | +6% |       |       |        |    |
|      | +9% | +1.6% |       |       |     |       | +7% |     |       |       |        |    |
|      |     |       |       |       |     | +4.9% |     |     |       |       |        |    |
| +19% |     |       |       | +2.7% | +4% |       |     |     |       |       |        |    |
|      |     |       | +4.5% |       |     |       |     |     |       |       |        |    |


---
Trends in area of organic land worldwide 2020 (million hectares) by land use 60M 50M Permanent grassland 40M Arable crops 30M Permanent crops 20M 10M 0M 2005 2010 2015 2020 Source: FiBL- IFOAM–The World of Organic Agriculture 2022 Although the global area of organic arable land has increased by 9.5 million ha between 2005 and 2020 (an increase of over 200%) this is much smaller than for permanent grassland (up 29 million ha in the same period)6. In the UK, the area of organic land was in A quarter of all decline for many years following the financial crash in 2008, but has been increasing again since 2018. By 2021, the total area organic sales made under organic management in the UK was 506,000 ha with 46,600 ha in arable crops (accounting for just 9.2%) where in the UK are within permanent grassland makes up 61%7.
the dairy category, Clearly most organic certified farmland is not used for arable cropping. However, continued strong UK demand for which includes eggs, organic dairy and poultry—sectors with the highest demand for animal feedstuffs—has created a structural imbalance one of the fastest within the UK which is driving increased dependence on imports of organic animal feedstuffs. Alongside this, global growing organic demand is rising, leading to increased prices. This presents a significant opportunity for arable farmers to convert to organic categories8.
production to supply this growing market.


---
Does Organic Arable Stack Up?
Comparing financial performance of organic and non-organic arable farming The easiest way to compare organic and non-organic performance is to look at gross margins based on a single year’s crop costs and yields. The assumption is usually made that non-organic will easily out-perform organic because there are more inputs available to maximise yield, and therefore profitability. But figures from the Rural Business Network do not support this assumption.
Gross margin analysis of organic and non-organic crops (£/hectare) Source Rural Business Survey 2015/16 Organic Farming in England (Editor’s note: At the time of going to press (June 2022), updated information was not available. It is expected imminently and will be available online at w.soilassociation.org/arable-report This simple analysis is misleading to whole farm profitability. In a with mechanical weeders, replacing because on organic farms it is stockless system, a fertility building variable with fixed costs. Fixed costs the importance of rotations, crop is a cost; but on a mixed farm can also be reduced under organic fertility breaks and interactions it is a feed source, with livestock with less machinery and crop between enterprises that generates contributing to overall farm gross storage needed. In addition, more profitability, not one individual crop. margin. spring cropping and longer rotations reduce the size and cost of the Organic farms are often mixed or Another difference between organic machinery needed on organic farms, have a high value niche crop as and non-organic farms is the as well as significantly reducing total part of their rotation, with that crop replacement of crop management working capital requirements.
or the livestock enterprise adding tools such as chemicals and fertiliser


---
Defining ‘Organic, ‘Agroecological’ and ‘Regenerative’ In a world that needs all thoughts, actions and practices nature and using holistic and long-term solutions to be labelled or put in boxes, the terms ‘organic’, rather than quick fixes. Agroecological farmers can use ‘regenerative’ and ‘agroecological’ stand out as farming artificial inputs, but systems and rotations are still based systems that may seem to compete. In reality, they are around a circular system which keeps soil health as its mutually inclusive but offer differences. starting point.
Organic is a legally defined system with inspection and Regenerative farming is a term becoming commonly verification as its backbone. If you do not comply with used and is based around five key principles (minimising its standards, you are not an organic farmer. Organic is a cultivations, keeping ground covered, keeping living ‘whole system’ approach to farming and food production. roots in the ground, diversity of plants and integrating It recognises the close interrelationships between all parts livestock). In addition, there is an ambition to reduce of the production system, from the soil to the consumer. the use of fertilisers and sprays. Without any form of verification, any farmer adopting any of these practices Although some define it by the prohibition of inputs can call themselves regenerative, but does not need (artificial fertilisers and agrochemicals), organic farming is to do them all. It has become synonymous with arable more complex because it is a whole farm system, using farmers and no-till systems but could equally apply to methods which reduce the need for these inputs. Being livestock systems.
recognised in law means products come with a premium, based on an assurance that they are largely chemical free Many regenerative farmers are finding that the practices and that animal welfare standards are higher. they employ are getting closer to those used by organic farmers. As soil health increases through cover crops, It is here that there comes an overlap with agroecology, the need for fertiliser and agrochemicals reduces and a system defined by the FAO (the Food and Agriculture farm biodiversity returns.
Organisation of the UN) based on 10 elements (diversity; synergies; efficiency; resilience; As with agroecology, there is no verification, no recycling; co-creation; social values; culture; inspection and no premium for the products from responsible governance; circular and regenerative farms. Unless destined for local markets, solidarity economy). It describes a they are sold into the same marketplace as products whole farm approach, recycling from the conventional farming systems, where there nutrients, working with is no way to differentiate between different farming approaches.
As a benchmarking tool, Net Farm Income (NFI), is a measure which allows Editor’s note: At the time of going to individual farms of different tenure, business organisation and indebtedness press (June 2022), updated information was not available. It is expected to be compared directly with one another on a consistent basis. Using this imminently and will be available online at methodology, which includes imputed rent but excludes ownership costs and w.soilassociation.org/arable-report interest payments, the table below compares organic and non-organic farm types in the year ending March 2016.
Comparative income figures (£/hectare) for organic and non-organic farm types These benchmarking figures show that organic farms generate 90% of the total output per hectare of a non-organic farm.
Agricultural output accounts for 79% of this, the difference being due to environmental payments which are higher on average for organic farms. Overall costs are 16% less due to no fertiliser and crop protection costs, although overheads are slightly higher.
Source: Rural Business Survey 2015/16 Organic Farming in England Overall the Net Farm Income of £211/ha is significantly higher than the non-organic figure of £96/ha.



| NFI/HA (£) 2015/16   |   ORGANIC MEAN |   NON-ORGANIC MEAN |   DIFFERENCE |
|:---------------------|---------------:|-------------------:|-------------:|
| Cropping             |            211 |                 96 |          115 |
| Horticulture         |           1052 |               1171 |         -119 |
| Dairy                |            366 |                168 |          198 |
| LFA grazing          |            130 |                 80 |           50 |
| Lowland grazing      |            122 |                  0 |          122 |
| Mixed                |            187 |                122 |           65 |


---
Selling Organic Opportunities and developments in the organic supply chain The market within the UK for organic arable production is coming of age. From very small beginnings when organic grains were first traded, the market for organic crops within the UK has grown consistently, with over 200,000 tonnes now required each year, most of which is imported. This provides increased opportunity for growth for the UK arable land area for import substitution, which coincides with both consumer and supply chain demand for relocalisation.
The organic market is characterised by a high level of entrepreneurship, essential for developing markets. However, as the market matures, more sophisticated trading mechanisms are starting to be developed which provide greater security for growers.
Organic farmers often grow a wider range of crops than many of their non-organic counterparts, including rye, spelt, triticale, quinoa, peas and beans and starting to look at the potential for soya.
As consumer attitudes change4, there is potential for increased organic pulse production in the UK, for human consumption as well as for livestock feed.
Provenance is a key driver for the organic market. This becomes more important as the market grows, because pulling in product from all over the world can exacerbate consumer concerns over integrity. This coincides with current geopolitical instability and the demonstrable impact of climate change. To combat this, supply chains are increasingly starting to demand that organic farmers include UK-produced feedstuffs in livestock diets.
Retailer taking the lead An example of this is a multiple retailer with a major stake in the organic sector in the UK. They are working to support organic arable farmers with stabilised pricing contracts for all crops produced in a typical organic rotation (peas/beans; wheat and barley/oats). They are doing this to reduce the risk in supply chains from:
• currency fluctuations associated with importing organic feedstuffs • feed supply integrity concerns associated with feedstuffs from some countries • uncertainty over future trading arrangements • meeting consumer expectations of UK organic foods


---
ORGANIC PERSPECTIVE Paul Dovey, Farm Manager, Goodwood Home Farm 3,800 acres, West Sussex The bottom line: price data for organic cereals "Conversion to organic started in the 1990s. The farm had always been Organic farmers are benefitting from sustained prices mixed with dairy and arable cropping.
Now some 25 years later we’re above those for non-organic cereals with premiums over even more diverse, with an arable conventional prices. Pricing is often localised and based on enterprise, dairy, beef, pig and sheep.
spot sales rather than contract or futures. We also process malting barley and milk.
In 2022 volatility in prices are driven by hydrocarbon inflation For me, successful organic arable and supply chain disruptions. The former has less impact on farming is about timing and planning.
organic farms than the latter. There is a clear separation in There are no ‘get out of jail free cards’! From preparing for the this regard with the conventional sector, making meaningful rotation, thinking about the soil, price comparisons difficult. selecting the right varieties, through to using the most effective crop establishment kit to ensure seeds are in the right place—all elements are essential. It’s much easier to think it Prices for organic cereals in 2022 through first than find remedies later.
One of our innovations is to use the dirty water from the dairy herd to provide extra nutrients and moisture for the arable crops. We estimate this has improved arable yields by up to 0.5 tonnes per ha.
The arable rotation includes wheat, followed by malting barley, then whole crop for the cattle on the farm into a grass/clover fertility building phase. Much of the malting barley produced is used to make our own Source: Saxon Agriculture, May 2022 (for monthly updates, see w.soilassociation.org/price-data) organic beer.
I’m a great believer in selling direct whenever we can. Much of our wheat is sold through the Soil Association Organic Marketplace to organic livestock farmers in England. Whilst In 2022 volatility farming organically was a decision made many years ago, it still makes in prices are driven great business sense. Reducing reliance on inputs with high price by hydrocarbon volatility is a bonus. Selling direct to inflation and supply the customer completes the circular picture for this farm." chain disruptions



| CROP            | £/TONNE   |
|:----------------|:----------|
| Wheat, feed     | £465      |
| Wheat, milling  | £520      |
| Barley, feed    | £430      |
| Barley, malting | POA       |
| Oats, milling   | £360      |
| Oats, feed      | £360      |
| Beans           | £565      |


---
Growing Organic Answering some common questions about organic arable production Rotations: Do you need livestock to farm organically?
Unlike non-organic farms, organic arable farming is dependent on nutrients in the soil. As a result, legumes, green manures, cover crops and fertility building periods are essential to the success of organic cereal growing. The simplest rotations are two to three years of grass/clover followed by a cereal, a legume and an under-sown spring cereal with green manures grown in the overwinter gaps. Longer rotations are possible, with hungry crops like vegetables following a legume and competitive crops like oats following a weedy crop.
It is most common for organic arable farmers to introduce livestock to graze the grass/clover leys and to produce farmyard manure to support soil fertility but there are organic farmers running ‘stockless arable’ systems. This is becoming more feasible with increasing availability of anaerobic digestate alongside more traditional methods of building fertility such as fertility building leys, green manures and in some cases composted green waste materials.
Organic farm gross margins tend to be higher from mixed farms than from stockless arable farms, but once labour costs and capital costs associated with livestock production are included especially where new infrastructure is required, stockless systems can outperform mixed farms.
Cultivation: Do all organic farmers rely on the plough?
Most organic farmers use ploughs as the main cultivation tool, although discs and non-inversion techniques do have a role. Stale seedbeds are a technique used to create a weed free seedbed and this can be done using shallow cultivations without ploughing. The simple rotation mentioned above would involve ploughing at most three times in six years. Innovative Farmers have run trials on terminating cover-crops with crimper rollers and are looking at living mulches of clover to provide a permanent understorey allowing direct drilling.
These would provide a mulch and soil improver, without disturbing the soil, prior to drilling.
Weeds: Are all organic crops full of weeds?
Weed control is the biggest challenge for organic farming. There are now increasingly sophisticated mechanical options such as interrow cultivators, weed harrows, weed surfers and comb cutters. It is common to use higher seed rates to produce a more competitive crop to suppress weeds early in the growing season, and generally to select varieties on growth characteristics as much as yield data. Another weed control technique is drilling later in the autumn than on non-organic farms, meaning the crop is more competitive in the spring when weeds start germinating. The weed spectrum is different in organic cereals, weeds like cleavers and wild oats are less competitive because there are no fertiliser applications. Crop rotations, spring cropping and ploughing all reduce the influence of blackgrass but it can still be found on organic farms.


---
Pests and diseases: How can you tackle pests and diseases without sprays?
Diseases are less of an issue with organic crops, often considered to be due to lower nitrate levels in the plant making it less susceptible. Selecting more resistant varieties is a good strategy. The diverse nature of organic farms and the lack of insecticidal treatments leads to an increase in the number of beneficial insects reducing the problems associated with pests, although ferric sulphate is approved for slug control. No seed treatments are allowed in organic systems, but later drilling reduces the risks. Variety mixes are more common in organic systems, giving some possible extra protection against disease.
Crop varieties: What varieties are available organically? Can I use any seed?
The AHDB’s ‘Recommended Lists’ can give some guidance on a variety’s potential, but the ‘untreated’ figures relate to a crop where every input other than pesticides have been used. However, many researchers state that such trials are unhelpful for organic farmers, giving false rankings. Varieties with deep rooting characteristics to scavenge for nutrients, and good ground cover potential to suppress weeds, are best for organic systems. Where organic seed is not available, cleaned non-organic seeds can be used but a derogation must be obtained first. An online database—w.organicxseeds.co.uk—shows available organic seeds and varieties.
Crop nutrition: How do you get decent yields without artificial fertilisers?
No artificial fertilisers are allowed in organic systems, only ones from a natural source. Where there is a deficiency found, control bodies will give permission to use lime, phosphorus and potassium fertilisers from a list of approved products. Livestock manures can be used but must be composted for 12 months if from a non-organic source. Anaerobic digestate from some sources is approved, but this must be checked first. The use of deep rooting crops like sainfoin, chicory and fodder radish has been found to bring nutrients up from lower soil strata and there is some evidence that the absence of artificial fertiliser can improve the supply from the soil’s reserves, perhaps by triggering improved soil bacterial function.


---
Supporting Organic Securing organic opportunities post Brexit We are seeing major changes in government thinking on agriculture and the environment, specifically through the Agricultural Transition Plan (ATP) in England. Moving away from simple area-based payments, the ATP focuses on supporting farmers for the delivery of public goods, such as healthy soils, improved water quality, climate mitigation and increased biodiversity.
Following extensive lobbying efforts, we are delighted to finally see organic Soil Association and EOF will included within the recently announced Sustainable Farm Incentive Policy continue to support the sector by (SFI)9 and welcome DEFRA’s acknowledgement of the benefits that organic prioritising the following:
farming offers the wider environment.
1. Help develop an organic The Soil Association in partnership with the English Organic standard in the ATP for 2025.
Forum (EOF) have urged DEFRA to recognise organic 2. Strongly urge organic farmers within the Agricultural Transition, including through to extend their existing CS SFI. This work has resulted in organic farmers agreements/enter into new ones qualifying for the higher level payments before the end of 2023.
available through the SFI’s soil standards, plus inclusion and reward of temporary leys in 3. Engage with the development the arable land area. It has also ensured of all the SFI standards to that organic farmers would be able ensure that organic farmers are to join Countryside Stewardship (CS) adequately rewarded for the alongside SFI and not get caught out public goods that they produce, by ‘double funding’ for land receiving and at the same payment rates organic conversion and or maintenance as for those same actions if payments. DEFRA have also agreed to carried out by conventional explore the inclusion of a new organic farmers.
standard in 2025 to provide an easy, holistic and accessible package for 4. Influence the development organic farmers. of Local Nature Recovery11 to include certified organic The inclusion of organic as part of SFI farmland that delivers is a promising sign for the future of farm biodiversity gains as well as food.
payments. However, we must continue to lobby DEFRA to ensure our ambitions are 5. Attempt to ensure that capital realised. It was reassuring to hear Secretary of State, grants and productivity initiatives George Eustice say these words at the Soil Association are relevant to organic farmers conference on Agroecology: focused on resource efficiency and public goods delivery.
"We are committed to a holistic organic standard. The benefits of organic farming are clear. I’ve visited organic farms and it is very clear what they deliver for nature, and I have been very clear throughout this transition that we do not want to undermine the business models of people who have already been doing the right thing over the last ten to fifteen years. It would be a sorry outcome if we put together all those incentives to try to change the farmers who have not been nature friendly farming to start doing the right thing but along the way omitted to protect the financial viability of those that have always been doing the right thing. So as we move away from BPS (Basic Payment Scheme) payments to future ones it is important that those that are doing the right thing see their income for agri-environment work increase and I think there is something to be said for a holistic organic standard recognising all that that entails"10.


---
ORGANIC PERSPECTIVE Andrew Bullock Bradwell Sezincote Farm, 730 ha mixed arable, Gloucestershire " We are continuing to ensure that the devolved "We started the organic conversion process in 2019, to improve the environment and governments set the same ambitions targets and control blackgrass in our arable rotation.
support for those who are already achieving such We’ve received CS funding to support positive environmental outcomes. conversion and have already received a premium for our in-conversion grains.
Although 2022 application window is now closed in Scotland, We’re due to sell our first organic crop for we will continue our support for farmers and crofters interested a premium this year. We’re trying to grow in conversion. crops for human consumption, milling wheat and oats, malting barley and trialling In Wales we will press for organic conversion and existing spelt and heritage wheat. There are plenty organic farmers to be supported by the new environmental of markets out there and prices have risen schemes when announced.
to around 65% above conventional, which is about right.
The biggest positive is the reduction in risk. Although current high prices for Keep up to date conventional crops make margins look favourable, increasing fertiliser and other CS rates are now on average 30% higher for most types of inputs costs are fast becoming a serious farmland than they were prior to 2022, with increases of consideration. When we were farming between 50-110% for conversion rates. These rate changes conventionally, if we didn’t achieve a good came into effect in January 2022. yield, a reasonable profit soon became a big loss. The other challenge was cash Countryside Stewardship Scheme (CSS) is a five-year agreement availability—we would need three times and organic conversion funding includes increased payments more cash up front. Organic crops will only for the first two years, providing a financial boost for farmers see a small increase in costs.
through their conversion period. Under the 2022 CSS, rotational land in conversion to organic is eligible at the moment for The organic crops are currently looking payments of £256/ha/year for up to two years—46% higher good and due to their lower potential yield are better placed to find water and nutrients than pre-2022 rates.
in dry times. Another week of dry weather and conventional crops lose much of their potential. Previously we were spending more money upfront without knowing where arable prices would be. With organic, After 2024, farmers the risks and input costs are lower, and farm will be able to leave their profit is largely equal. I predict profit margins existing countryside stewardship/ will continue to increase now that we’re environmental stewardship agreements fully converted, and we’re improving our without penalty, if they wish to join the environment, biodiversity and soil health.
new Environmental Land Management (ELMS) I’d recommend anyone looking to convert schemes—so this shouldn’t be a deterrent for should go for it! You can access stewardship applying for available conversion funding or funding and cross over into ELMS later.
extending existing organic agreements. You can always consider a share farming agreement with a local grazier if you don’t For up-to-date information on funding want to venture into livestock yourself, but opportunities for organic farmers, visit the still want the fertility." Soil Association’s Financial information pages at w.soilassociation.org/organicconversion-england


---
Going Organic What is involved in conversion and certification What is organic certification?
Organic farming is defined by EU law and therefore any product sold as organic in the UK must comply with a set of production and processing standards. DEFRA oversee approved certification bodies such as Soil Association Certification to provide organic certification and inspection services to organic farms.
Soil Association Certification is an approved organic certification body which is a wholly owned by the Soil Association Charity, certifying thousands of organic farms and processing businesses across the whole organic food and drink supply chain in the UK. They help businesses to navigate the requirements of organic conversion and certification, inspect farms to organic standards and provide them with an organic licence to sell products with use of the Soil Association Organic Symbol. As a not-for-profit business, any surplus income is gift aided to the Soil Association charity to develop, build and safeguard the organic sector. They certify all farm sizes and enterprises and provide organic certification for on-farm processing and packing.
Land and crop conversion Before marketing land or selling animals or products as organic, farms must undergo a ‘conversion period’ where land and animals are managed to the organic standards for a required period. This provides time to start establishing organic management techniques and build soil fertility and biological activity.
The conversion period for land is typically two years, although there is scope Find out more to reduce this if it can be demonstrated that land has been managed according about certification to organic standards before entering conversion. Perennials will also require a further twelve months on top of the standard two-year period before the crop Get in touch with Soil Association can be harvested as organic. To produce an organic annual crop, seed must be Certification’s expert producer team sown into and harvested from land that has completed its conversion period to find out more about organic and has organic status. Crops harvested during the second year of conversion certification and conversion and how can be sold as ‘in conversion’. For more information on organic conversion it can work on your farm.
please view Soil Association Certification’s crop conversion guide12 and livestock and poultry conversion guide13. Call: 0117 914 2412 Email:
Annual inspections and support goorganic@soilassociation.org Organic certification includes a physical inspection of the farm every year to Visit:
look at land, livestock, crops and records to verify that all organic production w.soilassociation.org/ rules are met. Every Soil Association Certification farming licensee is assigned certification/farming an experienced certification officer, responsible for managing their organic certification and signposting to business support. An application inspection is undertaken by Soil Association Certification auditors. Soil Association Certification provides a range of benefits for their clients including joint audits, organic market insights, marketing materials and support and organic farming communications.


---
Useful contacts Soil Association Certification T: 0117 914 2412 E: cert@soilassociation.org Soil Association Charity T: 0117 314 5100 E: producer.support@soilassociation.org Defra Organic Team E: organic.standards@defra.gsi.gov.uk Innovative Farmers T: 0117 987 4572 E: info@innovativefarmers.org Natural England T: 0300 060 3900 E: enquiries@naturalengland.org.uk Organic Research Centre T: 01488 658298 E: elmfarm@organicresearchcentre.com Organic Trade Board E: info@organictradeboard.co.uk Useful information Downloadable version of this report Organic farming statistics UK Organic Market Report Technical information on organic arable farming


---
References:
1 Based on data from the Agriculture Industries Confederation 2 2022 edition of the World of Organic Agriculture 3 Soil Association Certification Organic Market Report 2022 4 Soil Association Certification (2021) Sustainability and Organic, joining the dots 5 DEFRA Organic Farming Statistics 2021 6 2022 edition of the World of Organic Agriculture 7 DEFRA Organic Farming Statistics 2021 8 Soil Association Certification Organic Market Report 2022 9 Defra—Sustainable Farming Incentive: how the scheme will work in 2022 (December 2021) 10 YouTube—Nature & Net Zero & Food Security? Exploring the agroecological solution Nature & Net Zero & Food Security? Exploring the agroecological solution 11 Defra—Environmental Land Management schemes: overview (March 2021) 12 Soil Association Certification Conversion Guide—Arable and Horticulture 13 Soil Association Certification Conversion Guide—Livestock and Poultry Get in touch Producer Support, Farming and Land Use Team To speak to a farming advisor: 0117 314 5100 For general enquiries: 0300 330 0100 Email: producer.support@soilassociation.org Producer Certification Team For information about organic certification and conversion: 0117 914 2412 Email: cert@soilassociation.org w.soilassociation.org/arable-report


---
