# uksi_20102605_en.pdf

S T A T U T O R Y I N S T R U M E N T S 2010 No. 2605 SEEDS, ENGLAND The Seed Marketing Regulations 2010 Made - - - - 23rd October 2010 Laid before Parliament 28th October 2010 Coming into force - - 22nd November 2010 CONTENTS PART 1 Introduction 1. Title, application and commencement 3 2. Meaning of "marketing" 3 3. Interpretation of other terms 3 PART 2 Categories of seed 4. Seed to which these Regulations apply 4 5. Categories of seed 4 6. Breeder’s seed 4 7. Maintainers for pre-basic and basic seed 4 PART 3 Marketing seed 8. Marketing seed 5 9. Exceptions 5 10. Overriding requirements: the building blocks necessary for certification 5 11. Detailed requirements for certification 5 12. Crop inspections 6 13. Standard of seed at the time of marketing 6 14. Re-grading a crop or seed 6 15. Control plots and tests 6 16. Packaging and sealing 6 17. Labelling 6 18. Mixtures of seed 7 19. Records 7


---
PART 4 Licensing 20. Operations requiring a licence from the Secretary of State 7 21. Licensing crop inspectors, seed samplers and seed testing stations 8 22. General provisions relating to licences 8 PART 5 Administration and revocations 23. Withdrawing certification 8 24. Sampling for enforcement purposes 8 25. Forms of certificates used for enforcement 9 26. Certification for export 9 27. Importation from outside the European Union 9 28. Appeals 9 29. Fees 10 30. Marketing seed under a specific derogation 10 31. Confidentiality 10 32. Licensing and certifying in another part of the United Kingdom 10 33. Transitional provisions 10 34. Revocations 10 SCHEDULE 1 — Seed to which these Regulations apply 12 SCHEDULE 2 — Certification requirements 15 PART 1 — Beet 16 PART 2 — Cereals 18 PART 3 — Fodder plants 21 PART 4 — Oil and fibre 25 PART 5 — Vegetables 27 SCHEDULE 3 — Labelling and loose sales 29 PART 1 — Introduction 30 PART 2 — Official labels 30 PART 3 — Additional requirements for official labels for specific species 33 PART 4 — Supplier’s labels 34 PART 5 — Sales of loose seed 38 SCHEDULE 4 — Exceptions 38 PART 1 — Supply of seed other than by way of marketing 39 PART 2 — Marketing seed that does not comply with Schedule 2 40 PART 3 — Certifying seed that does not fully comply with these Regulations 43 2


---
The Secretary of State makes these Regulations in exercise of the powers in sections 16(1), (1A), (2), (3), (4), (5), (5A) and 36 of the Plant Varieties and Seeds Act 1964(a), after consultation in accordance with section 16(1) of that Act with representatives of such interests as appear to be concerned, and in exercise of the powers in paragraph 1A of Schedule 2 to the European Communities Act 1972(b).
The Regulations make provision for a purpose mentioned in section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972 and it appears to the Secretary of State that it is expedient for the references to the Directives specified in regulation 3 to be construed as references to those Directives as amended from time to time.
PART 1 Introduction Title, application and commencement 1. These Regulations may be cited as the Seed Marketing Regulations 2010; they apply in England and come into force on 22nd November 2010.
Meaning of "marketing" 2.—(1) In these Regulations "marketing" means the sale, holding with a view to sale, offer for sale or any disposal, supply or transfer aimed in each case at commercial exploitation of seed to third parties, whether or not for consideration.
(2) But marketing does not include trade that is not aimed at commercial exploitation, such as— (a) the supply of seed to official testing and inspection bodies; or (b) the supply of seed to a person who provides processing services but who does not acquire title to the seed.
Interpretation of other terms 3.—(1) For the purposes of these Regulations— (a) the "United Kingdom National List" is the list of plant varieties published by the Secretary of State in accordance with the provisions of the Seeds (National Lists of Varieties) Regulations 2001(c); (b) the "Common Catalogue" is the catalogue provided for in Council Directive 2002/53/EC on the common catalogue of varieties of agricultural plant species(d) and in Council Directive 2002/55/EC on the marketing of vegetable seed(e).
(2) In these Regulations all references to— (a) Council Directive 2002/54/EC on the marketing of beet seed(f), (b) Council Directive 66/402/EEC on the marketing of cereal seed(g), (a) 1964 c. 14. Section 16 has been amended by the European Communities Act 1972 (c. 68), section 4 and Schedule 4, paragraph 5; S.I. 1977/1112, and the Agriculture Act 1986 (c. 49), section 2. See section 38(1) for the definition of "the Minister". Under S.I. 2002/794 the functions of the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food under the Plant Varieties and Seeds Act 1964 which remained vested in that Minister were transferred to the Secretary of State.
(b) 1972 c. 68 as amended by the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006 (c. 51).
(c) S. I. 2001/3510 as amended by S. I. 2004/2949, 2007/1871, 2008/2683, 2009/1273 and 2010/1195.
(d) OJ No L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 1 as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council, OJ No L268, 18.10.2003, p. 1.
(e) OJ No L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 33 as last amended by Commission Decision 2009/145/EC. OJ No L 312, 27.11.2009, p. 44.
(f) OJ No L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 12 as last amended by Council Directive 2004/117/EC (OJ No L 14, 18.1.2005, p. 18).
(g) OJ No L 125, 11.7.1966, p. 2309 as last amended by Commission Directive 2009/74/EC (OJ No L 166, 27.6.2009, p. 40.
3


---
(c) Council Directive 66/401/EEC on the marketing of fodder plant seed(a), (d) Council Directive 2002/57/EEC on the marketing of seed and fibre plants(b), (e) Council Directive 2002/55/EEC on the marketing of vegetable seed(c), are references to those Directives as amended from time to time.
PART 2 Categories of seed Seed to which these Regulations apply 4.—(1) These Regulations apply in relation to seed of the plants in the first column of the table in Schedule 1 intended to be used for agricultural or horticultural production, but do not apply in relation to seed intended to be used for ornamental plants.
(2) They do not apply in relation to seed intended for export outside the European Union (other than regulation 26 which relates to certification for export).
Categories of seed 5. Seed is divided into the following categories, commonly known by the abbreviations given— (a) breeder’s seed ("BR"); (b) pre-basic seed ("PB"); (c) basic seed ("BS"); (d) certified seed ("CS"); (e) certified seed, first generation ("C1"); (f) certified seed, second generation ("C2"); (g) certified seed, third generation ("C3"); (h) commercial seed ("CM"); (i) standard seed (vegetables only) ("ST"); (j) seed of a higher voluntary standard ("HVS").
Breeder’s seed 6. Breeder’s seed is seed produced by or under the responsibility of the breeder and intended for the production of pre-basic seed or basic seed.
Maintainers for pre-basic and basic seed 7. Pre-basic seed and basic seed may only be produced with the written authorisation of the person listed as the maintainer of that seed in the United Kingdom National List or the Common Catalogue.
(a) OJ No L 125, 11.7.1966, p. 2298 as last amended by Commission Directive 2009/74/EC, OJ No L 166, 27.6.2009, p. 40.
(b) OJ No L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 74 as last amended by Commission Directive 2009/74/EC, OJ No L 166, 27.6.2009, p. 40.
(c) OJ No L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 33 as last amended by Commission Decision 2009/145/EC, OJ No L 312, 27.11.2009, p. 44.
4


---
PART 3 Marketing seed Marketing seed 8. Seed to which these Regulations apply may only be marketed as seed if it is— (a) certified under regulation 10 and 11 as being one of the categories in regulation 5; (b) packaged and sealed in accordance with regulation 16; (c) labelled in accordance with regulation 17; (d) marketed by a person licensed to do so in accordance with regulation 20.
Exceptions 9.—(1) The requirement for certification does not apply in relation to breeder’s seed.
(2) Schedule 4 makes provision for the marketing of seed not fully complying with regulation 8.
Overriding requirements: the building blocks necessary for certification 10. To be certified under these Regulations as one of the categories in regulation 5 seed must— (a) be a variety entered in the United Kingdom National List or the Common Catalogue; (b) be grown from a seed eligible to produce that category in accordance with Schedule 2; (c) come from a crop inspected under these Regulations and certified as complying with the requirements of Schedule 2; (d) be tested in accordance with these Regulations.
Detailed requirements for certification 11.—(1) In order to be certified a sample of the seed from which the crop is going to be produced must be entered with the Secretary of State in sufficient time for the Secretary of State to grow a control plot.
(2) The Secretary of State may accept the entry of a sample of the seed after this time, but in this case the crop grown to produce the seed must be inspected by an official crop inspector in accordance with regulation 12.
(3) The crop used to produce the seed must be inspected by a crop inspector in accordance with the provisions relating to that crop in Schedule 2, and the crop inspector must certify that— (a) the crop meets the standard for that crop specified in Schedule 2, or (b) the crop meets a lower standard but still meets one of the standards in Schedule 2, and lodge a report to that effect with the Secretary of State.
(4) The crop inspector may indicate that remedial action or further inspection is necessary before the crop is certified as meeting the required standard.
(5) Once the crop has been harvested and processed, a sample of the seed must be taken by a licensed seed sampler (using current international sampling methods in so far as they exist) in accordance with the provisions relating to that crop in Schedule 2 (for the avoidance of doubt the seed lot sizes and sample weights are specified in each of the Directives in that Schedule dealing with the seed).
(6) The seed must be tested in a seed testing station (either licensed or operated by the Secretary of State), which must test the seed (using current international sampling and testing methods in so far as they exist) to ensure that the certification standards in Schedule 2 are complied with and issue a seed test report stating the results and lodge the report with the Secretary of State.
5


---
Crop inspections 12. A crop inspection for certification must be carried out by a licensed crop inspector; except for the inspection of— (a) a crop intended for the production of pre-basic or basic seed, or (b) a crop producing seed when the entry of the seed under regulation 11 was too late to allow the Secretary of State to grow a control plot, when the inspection must be carried out by an official crop inspector appointed by the Secretary of State for the purposes of such inspection.
Standard of seed at the time of marketing 13. At the time of marketing the seed must as a minimum comply with the standards in Schedule 2 relating to that type of seed.
Re-grading a crop or seed 14. For the avoidance of doubt, if a crop or seed has been certified as belonging to one category, but complies with the requirements of another category for that seed, it may be re-graded as any category for which it satisfies the requirements.
Control plots and tests 15.—(1) The Secretary of State must carry out any necessary tests on the entered seed, and in particular must grow the seed in a control plot.
(2) If the tests or the control plot meets the requirements for varietal identity and varietal purity no further action is taken.
(3) Otherwise the Secretary of State must obtain more information from crops grown from that seed and, if the Secretary of State decides that the crop is not satisfactory, notify the applicant that the crop may not be certified, or must be downgraded to a lower category.
Packaging and sealing 16.—(1) All seed, other than loose sales (for which see Part 5 of Schedule 3) must be supplied in a sealed package by a person licensed to do so under regulation 20.
(2) The packaged seed must be in homogeneous lots.
(3) A package must be sealed by or under the supervision of a licensed seed sampler.
(4) It must either have a non-re-useable sealing system or be sealed in such a manner that opening the package— (a) damages the sealing system; or (b) leaves evidence of tampering on either the label or the package.
(5) If a package is opened other than by the final consumer it must be re-labelled and re-sealed by or under the supervision of a licensed seed sampler, and the fact of resealing, the most recent date of resealing and the authority responsible for it must be stated on the label.
(6) This regulation does not apply in relation to the marketing of small packages of seed as defined in Schedule 3.
Labelling 17.—(1) All seed must be labelled in accordance with Schedule 3 by a person licensed to do so under regulation 20.
(2) No person may reproduce, remove, alter, deface, conceal or misuse in any way any label produced for the purposes of these Regulations.
6


---
Mixtures of seed 18. A mixture of seed may only be marketed if the mixture is permitted under the following table.
Permitted mixtures Column Beet Cereals Fodder Oil and Vegetable Seed outside the header fibre scope of these Regulations Beet No No No No No No Cereals No Yes(i) Yes No No No Fodder No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Oil and No No Yes No No No fibre Vegetable No No Yes No Yes(ii) No (i) A mixture of species of cereal seed is permitted only if it is effective against the propagation of a harmful organism. All the seed must comply with these Regulations before mixing.
(ii) A mixture of different varieties of standard seed of lettuce, or a mixture of different varieties of standard seed of radish, must be marketed in a package containing not more than 50g of seed.
Records 19.—(1) Any person who— (a) markets seed, (b) packs, seals, labels, re-packs, re-seals or re-labels seed for marketing, (c) prepares mixtures of seed for marketing, or (d) cleans, treats or in any other way processes seed intended for marketing, must make sufficient records (either written or electronic) to create an audit trail so that the identity and provenance of any seed marketed or otherwise dealt with in the course of the operation can be established.
(2) Records must be kept for at least 3 years and produced on demand to an officer of the Secretary of State (in the case of electronic records a printout must be provided).
PART 4 Licensing Operations requiring a licence from the Secretary of State 20.—(1) Any person carrying out any of the following operations must be licensed to do so by the Secretary of State— (a) marketing seed; (b) packing, sealing or labelling seed; (c) re-packing, re-sealing or re-labelling seed; (d) preparing mixtures of seed for marketing; (e) cleaning, treating or in any other way processing seed intended for marketing.
(2) But the requirement for a licence does not apply in relation to the marketing of— (a) small packages of seed as defined in Schedule 3; (b) unpacketed seed; or 7


---
(c) seed, as grown, for processing, provided the identity of the seed is ensured under paragraph 2 of Schedule 4.
Licensing crop inspectors, seed samplers and seed testing stations 21.—(1) The Secretary of State may license crop inspectors, seed samplers and seed testing stations to act under these Regulations.
(2) Before licensing a crop inspector or seed sampler the Secretary of State must be satisfied that the person is competent to act as such, and has passed an examination specified by the Secretary of State.
(3) Before licensing a seed testing station the Secretary of State must be satisfied that the station has adequate premises, qualified personnel and equipment to test for the purposes of these Regulations.
(4) A licensed crop inspector, seed inspector or seed testing station may charge reasonable fees for carrying out functions under these Regulations but may not derive any private gain in connection with the carrying out of such functions.
General provisions relating to licences 22.—(1) A licence must be in writing, and may be subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.
(2) The Secretary of State may vary, suspend or revoke a licence by notice in writing at any time.
PART 5 Administration and revocations Withdrawing certification 23.—(1) The Secretary of State may withdraw certification from any seed if satisfied that— (a) the seed, or the seed from which the crop producing the seed was grown, was incorrectly sampled; (b) the crop from which the seed was harvested did not meet the conditions in Schedule 2; or (c) the seed— (i) did not meet the conditions in Schedule 2 when it was tested; or (ii) no longer meets those conditions.
(2) If certification is withdrawn the Secretary of State must notify the certification applicant.
(3) Within 7 days of being notified the applicant must notify any person to whom they have sold or supplied the seed.
Sampling for enforcement purposes 24.—(1) A sample of seed taken for the purposes of enforcing these Regulations must be taken by an authorised officer of the Secretary of State, who must divide it into three parts.
(2) One part must be given to the owner of the seed (or a representative of the owner) and the other two parts must be sent to an official testing station, one for testing and the other for retention pending production to a court in accordance with section 26(7) of the Plant Varieties and Seeds Act 1964.
8


---
Forms of certificates used for enforcement 25.—(1) For the purposes of section 26(3) of the Plant Varieties Act 1964, a certificate of how a sample was taken for the purpose of enforcing these Regulations must— (a) make reference to these Regulations, and must certify that the sample was taken and treated in accordance with regulation 24; (b) specify— (i) the name and address of the person taking the sample; (ii) the premises at which the sample was taken; (i) the type of seed sampled; (iv) the date the sample was taken; (v) the reference number of the seed lot; (vi) the quantity sampled.
(2) For the purposes of section 24(5) of the Plant Varieties Act 1964, a certificate of the result of a test at an official seed testing station of a sample taken by an authorised officer for the purposes of that Act must— (a) make reference to these Regulations; (b) identify the seed tested; (c) contain all test results relating to the standard required for that seed.
Certification for export 26. The Secretary of State may certify the quality of any seed intended for export outside the European Union.
Importation from outside the European Union 27.—(1) Seed imported from outside the European Union must be labelled with a label approved by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development(a) for the varietal certification on the control of seed moving in international trade.
(2) If the seed is to be further multiplied the person intending to multiply it must first submit a sample to the Secretary of State for verification.
(3) Any person marketing seed that has been imported from a third country and exceeds two kilograms must supply the Secretary of State, in writing and within one month of the first marketing of the seed, with the following particulars relating to the seed— (a) the species; (b) the variety; (c) the category; (d) the country of production and the official inspection authority; (e) the country of despatch; (f) the importer; and (g) the quantity of seed.
Appeals 28.—(1) Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Secretary of State to— (a) Details of these labels are available on the OECD’s website.
9


---
(a) vary, suspend, revoke or refuse to grant a licence of a crop inspector, seed sampler , seed testing station, or a person requiring a licence under regulation 20, (b) refuse to certify seed, (c) withdraw certification of seed, may, within 21 days of being notified of the decision, appeal against it to a person appointed for the purpose by the Secretary of State.
(2) The appointed person must consider the appeal and any representations made by the Secretary of State, and within 21 days report in writing with a recommended course of action to the Secretary of State.
(3) The Secretary of State must then make a final decision and notify the appellant, together with the reasons.
Fees 29. The Secretary of State may charge a reasonable fee for anything done under these Regulations.
Marketing seed under a specific derogation 30. The Secretary of State acts as the member State for the purposes of Commission Regulation (EC) No 217/2006 laying down rules for the application of Council Directives 66/401/EEC, 66/402/EEC, 2002/54/EC, 2002/55/EC and 2002/57/EC as regards the authorisation of Member States to permit temporarily the marketing of seed not satisfying the requirements in respect of the minimum germination(a).
Confidentiality 31. If the breeder so requests, the description of genealogical components of seed must not be disclosed by the Secretary of State.
Licensing and certifying in another part of the United Kingdom 32.—(1) Any seed certified in another part of the United Kingdom may be marketed in England.
(2) A crop inspector, seed sampler or seed testing station licensed to act as such in another part of the United Kingdom may act as such under these Regulations.
Transitional provisions 33.—(1) A crop inspector, seed sampler or seed testing station licensed at the time these Regulations come into force under the Seed (Registration, Licensing and Enforcement) (England) Regulations 2002(b) continues to be licensed as such under these Regulations.
(2) A person requiring to be licensed under regulation 20 of these Regulations who was registered at the time that these Regulations come into force to act for such activity under the Seed (Registration, Licensing and Enforcement) (England) Regulations 2002 is now licensed to act as such under these Regulations subject to such conditions as may be notified by the Secretary of State and continues to be licensed unless the licence is subsequently suspended or revoked by the Secretary of State under these Regulations.
Revocations 34. The following are revoked— (a) OJ No L38, 9.2.2006, p. 17.
(b) S. I. 2002/3176 as last amended by S. I. 2004/2390, 2005/2676 and 2007/1872.
10


---
(a) the Beet Seed (England) Regulations 2002(a); (b) the Fodder Plant Seed (England) Regulations 2002(b); (c) the Cereal Seed (England) Regulations 2002(c); (d) the Oil and Fibre Plant Seed (England) Regulations 2002(d); (e) the Vegetable Seed (England) Regulations 2002(e); (f) the Seed (Registration, Licensing and Enforcement) (England) Regulations 2002(f); (g) the Oil and Fibre Plant Seed (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2003(g); (h) the Beet Seed (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2004(h); (i) the Cereal Seed (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2004(i); (j) the Fodder Plant Seed (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2004(j); (k) the Oil and Fibre Plant Seed (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2004(k); (l) the Vegetable Seed (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2004(l); (m) the Seed (Registration, Licensing and Enforcement) (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2004(m); (n) the Beet Seed (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2005(n); (o) the Cereal Seed (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2005(o); (p) the Fodder Plant (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2005(p); (q) the Oil and Fibre Plant Seed (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2005(q); (r) the Vegetable Seed (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2005(r); (s) the Seed (Registration, Licensing and Enforcement) (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2005(s); (t) the Seed (England) (Amendments for Tests and Trials etc) Regulations 2006(t); (u) the Cereal Seed (England) and Fodder Plant (England) (Amendment) Regulations 2006(u); (v) the Seed (Miscellaneous Amendments) (England) Regulations 2007(v); (w) the Seed (Conservation Varieties Amendments) (England) Regulations 2009(w).
Henley Parliamentary Under Secretary of State 23rd October 2010 Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (a) S. I. 2002/3171.
(b) S. I. 2002/3172.
(c) S. I. 2002/3173.
(d) S. I. 2002/3174.
(e) S. I. 2002/3175.
(f) S. I. 2002/3176.
(g) S. I. 2003/3101.
(h) S. I. 2004.2385.
(i) S. I. 2004/2386.
(j) S. I. 2004/2387.
(k) S. I. 2004/2388.
(l) S. I. 2004/2389.
(m) S. I. 2004/2390.
(n) S. I. 2005/2671.
(o) S. I. 2005/2672.
(p) S. I. 2005/2673.
(q) S. I. 2005/2674.
(r) S. I. 2005/2675.
(s) S. I. 2005/2676.
(t) S. I. 2006/2314.
(u) S. I. 2006/1678.
(v) S. I. 2007/1872.
(w) S. I. 2009/1274.
11


---
SCHEDULE 1 Regulation 4 Seed to which these Regulations apply Plants to which the Regulations apply Common name (for guidance only) Beet Beta vulgaris L. sugar beet, fodder beet (including mangel) Cereals Avena nuda L. small naked oat, hulless oat Avena sativa L. (includes A.byzantina K. Koch) oats and red oat Hordeum vulgare L. barley Secale cereale L. rye Triticum aestivum L. wheat Triticum durum Desf. durum wheat Triticum spelta L. spelt wheat x Triticosecale Wittm. ex A. Camus – hybrids triticale resulting from the crossing of a species of the genus Triticum and a species of the genus Secale Zea mays L. (partim) maize (except popcorn and sweetcorn) Fodder plants Fine grasses:
Agrostis canina L. velvet bent Agrostis capillaris L. brown top Agrostis gigantea Roth red top Agrostis stolonifera L. creeping bent grass Festuca filiformis Pourr. fine leaved sheep’s fescue Festuca ovina L. sheep’s fescue Festuca rubra L. red fescue, Chewings fescue Festuca trachyphylla (Hack.) Krajina hard fescue Poa annua L. annual meadowgrass Poa nemoralis L. wood meadowgrass Poa pratensis L. smooth-stalked meadowgrass Poa trivialis L. rough-stalked meadowgrass xFestulolium Asch. & Graebn. – Hybrids festulolium resulting from the crossing of a species of the genus Festuca with a species of the genus Lolium Fodder grasses:
Arrhenatherum elatius (L.) P.Beauv.ex J. tall oatgrass Presl & C. Presl 12


---
Plants to which the Regulations apply Common name (for guidance only) Bromus catharticus Vahl. rescue grass Bromus sitchensis Trin. Alaska brome-grass Dactylis glomerata L. cocksfoot Festuca arundinacea Schreber tall fescue Festuca pratensis Huds. meadow fescue Lolium multiflorum Lam. Italian ryegrass including Westerwold ryegrass Lolium perenne L. perennial ryegrass Lolium x boucheanum Kunth hybrid ryegrass Phleum nodosum L. small timothy Phleum pratense L. timothy Small seeded legumes:
Lotus corniculatus L. birdsfoot trefoil Medicago lupulina L. trefoil, black medick Medicago sativa L. lucerne Medicago x varia T. Martyn sand lucerne Onobrychis viciifolia Scop. sainfoin Trifolium hybridum L. Alsike clover Trifolium pratense L. red clover Trifolium repens L. white clover Large seeded legumes:
Lupinus albus L. white lupin Lupinus angustifolius L. narrow leaved lupin (previously known as blue lupin) Lupinus luteus L. yellow lupin Pisum sativum L. (partim) field pea Vicia faba L. (partim) field bean Vicia pannonica Crantz Hungarian vetch Vicia sativa L. common vetch Vicia villosa Roth hairy vetch Crucifers:
Brassica napus L. var. napobrassica (L.) swede Rchb.
Brassica oleracea L. convar. acephala fodder kale (DC.) Alef. var. medullosa Thell. + var.
viridis L.
Raphanus sativus L. var. oleiformis Pers. fodder radish 13


---
Plants to which the Regulations apply Common name (for guidance only) Oil and fibre plants Brassica juncea (L.) Czern. brown mustard Brassica napus L. (partim) swede rape (including plants commonly known as fodder rape and oilseed rape) Brassica nigra (L.) W.D.J. Koch black mustard Brassica rapa L. var. silvestris (Lam.) turnip rape Briggs Cannabis sativa L. hemp Glycine max (L.) Merr. soya bean Helianthus annuus L. sunflower Linum usitatissimum L. flax, linseed Sinapis alba L. white mustard Vegetables Allium cepa L. (Cepa Group) onion, Echalion Allium porrum L. leek Apium graveolens L. celery, celeriac Asparagus officinalis L. asparagus Beta vulgaris L. beetroot including Cheltenham beet, spinach beet and chard Brassica oleracea L. Brussels sprouts, cauliflower, curly kale, kohlrabi, red cabbage, Savoy cabbage, sprouting broccoli or calabrese, white cabbage Brassica rapa L. Chinese cabbage, turnip Cichorium endivia L. endive (curled-leaved, plain-leaved) Cichorium intybus L. large-leaved (Italian) chicory Cucumis melo L. melon Cucumis sativus L. cucumber, gherkin Cucurbita maxima Duchesne gourd Cucurbita pepo L. marrow or courgette Daucus carota L. carrot, fodder carrot Lactuca sativa L. lettuce Lycopersicon esculentum Mill tomato Petroselinum crispum (Mill) Nyman ex parsley A.W Hill Phaseolus coccineus L. runner bean Phaseolus vulgaris L. French bean (dwarf, climbing) Pisum sativum L. (partim) wrinkled pea, round pea, sugar pea Raphanus sativus L. radish, black radish Spinacia oleracea L. spinach Vicia faba L. (partim) broad bean 14


---
Plants to which the Regulations apply Common name (for guidance only) Zea mays L. (partim) sweet corn, popcorn SCHEDULE 2 Regulations 10, 11, 13 and 23 Certification requirements CONTENTS PART 1 Beet 1. Scope of Part 1 2. Interpretation of Part 1 3. Permitted types of beet seed 4. Meaning of "pre-basic seed" 5. Meaning of "basic seed" 6. Meaning of "certified seed" 7. Crop and seed requirements PART 2 Cereals CHAPTER 1 Types of seed 8. Scope of Part 2 9. Permitted types of cereal seed 10. Meaning of "pre-basic seed" (including hybrids) 11. Meaning of "basic seed" 12. Meaning of "certified seed" 13. Meaning of "certified seed, first generation" 14. Meaning of "certified seed, second generation" 15. Crop and seed requirements CHAPTER 2 Higher voluntary standards 16. Higher voluntary standards for cereals 17. Additional requirements for barley, wheat, durum wheat and spelt wheat 18. Seed from other plants 19. Ergot and sclerotia PART 3 Fodder plants CHAPTER 1 Basic standards 20. Scope of Part 3 21. Permitted types of fodder seed 22. Meaning of "pre-basic seed" 15


---
23. Meaning of "basic seed" 24. Meaning of "certified seed" 25. Meaning of "certified seed, first generation" 26. Meaning of "certified seed, second generation" 27. Meaning of "commercial seed" 28. Crop and seed requirements CHAPTER 2 Higher voluntary standards 29. Higher voluntary standards for fodder seed 30. Minimum standards for purity and other species of seed in the sample PART 4 Oil and fibre 31. Scope of Part 4 32. Permitted types of oil and fibre seed 33. Meaning of "pre-basic seed" 34. Meaning of "basic seed" for non-hybrid varieties 35. Meaning of "basic seed" for inbred lines 36. Meaning of "basic seed" for simple hybrids 37. Meaning of "certified seed" 38. Meaning of "certified seed, first generation" 39. Meaning of "certified seed, second generation" 40. Meaning of "certified seed, third generation" 41. Meaning of "commercial seed" 42. Crop and seed requirements 43. Requirements for a varietal association PART 5 Vegetables 44. Scope of Part 5 45. Permitted types of vegetable seed 46. Meaning of "pre-basic seed" 47. Meaning of "basic seed" 48. Meaning of "certified seed" 49. Meaning of "standard seed" 50. Crop and seed requirements PART 1 Beet Scope of Part 1 1. This Part regulates the type of beet in Schedule 1.
Interpretation of Part 1 2. In this Part— 16


---
(a) "monogerm seed" means seed that is genetically monogerm; and (b) "precision seed" means seed designed for use in precision drills to produce single seedlings.
Permitted types of beet seed 3. Beet seed must be— (a) pre-basic seed; (b) basic seed; or (c) certified seed.
Meaning of "pre-basic seed" 4. Pre-basic seed is seed— (a) produced from a generation prior to pre-basic seed by or under the responsibility of the breeder according to well-defined practices for the maintenance of the variety; and (b) intended for the production of— (i) more pre-basic seed; (ii) basic seed; or (i) with the breeder’s written authority, certified seed.
Meaning of "basic seed" 5. Basic seed is seed— (a) produced under the responsibility of the breeder according to well-defined practices for the maintenance of the variety; and (b) intended for the production of certified seed.
Meaning of "certified seed" 6. Certified seed is seed that is of direct descent from basic seed and is intended for the production of beet.
Crop and seed requirements 7.—(1) Crop inspections by official or licensed crop inspectors must be carried out in accordance with Annex I(A) to Council Directive 2002/54/EC on the marketing of beet seed(a), and the crop must satisfy the conditions in that Annex.
(2) The seed produced by the crop must be sampled in accordance with Article 9(2) and Annex II to that Directive, and must satisfy the conditions in Annex I(B) to that Directive.
(3) It must be labelled in accordance with Annex I to that Directive.
(4) The maximum moisture content must not exceed 15% by weight.
(5) Diseases and harmful organisms that reduce the usefulness of the seed must be at the lowest possible level.
(a) OJ No L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 12 as last amended by Council Directive 2004/117/EC (OJ No L 14, 18.1.2005, p. 18).
17


---
PART 2 Cereals CHAPTER 1 Types of seed Scope of Part 2 8. This Part regulates the types of cereal in Schedule 1.
Permitted types of cereal seed 9.—(1) Cereal seed must be— (a) pre-basic seed; (b) basic seed; (c) certified seed; (d) certified seed, first generation; (e) certified seed, second generation; or (f) seed of a higher voluntary standard.
(2) The seed may be a mixture of cereal species of different varieties provided that each variety in the mixture is certified and is effective against the propagation of harmful organisms.
Meaning of "pre-basic seed" (including hybrids) 10. Pre-basic seed (including hybrids) is seed— (a) produced from a generation prior to pre-basic seed or from pre-basic seed by or under the responsibility of the breeder according to well-defined practices for the maintenance of the variety; and (b) intended for the production of— (i) more pre-basic seed; (ii) basic seed; or (i) with the breeder’s written authority, certified seed of categories CS, C1 or C2 (hybrid varieties may not be produced to C1 or C2).
Meaning of "basic seed" 11. Basic seed is seed complying with the following conditions.
Type of cereal Condition Self-pollinating varieties of oats, naked oats, The seed must be— barley, rye, triticale, wheat, durum wheat and (a) produced under the responsibility of the spelt wheat breeder according to well-defined practices for the maintenance of the variety; and (b) intended for the production of certified seed of categories CS, C1 or C2 Hybrid varieties of oats, barley, rye, wheat, The seed must be intended for the production of durum wheat, spelt wheat triticale and maize hybrids 18


---
Type of cereal Condition Maize spp open-pollinated varieties The seed must be— (a) produced under the responsibility of the breeder according to well-defined practices for the maintenance of the variety; (b) intended for the production of seed of this variety of the category ‘certified seed’ triple cross or of top cross hybrid variety or of intervarietal hybrids Maize, inbred lines Any seed Meaning of "certified seed" 12. Certified seed is seed— (a) of rye, maize, or triticale and hybrids of barley, oats, wheat, durum wheat, spelt wheat; (b) that has been produced directly from basic seed or, if the breeder so requests, from seed of a generation prior to basic seed that satisfies the conditions for basic seed; and (c) that is intended for purposes other than the production of cereal seed.
Meaning of "certified seed, first generation" 13. Certified seed, first generation is seed— (a) of oats, barley, triticale, wheat, durum wheat or spelt wheat, other than hybrids in each case; (b) produced directly from basic seed or, if the breeder so requests, from pre-basic seed that satisfies the conditions for basic seed; (c) intended either for the production of seed of the category ‘certified seed, second generation’ or for purposes other than the production of cereal seed.
Meaning of "certified seed, second generation" 14. Certified seed, second generation is seed— (a) of oats, barley, triticale, wheat, durum wheat or spelt wheat, other than hybrids in each case; (b) produced directly from basic seed, from certified seed, first generation or, if the breeder so requests, from pre-basic seed that satisfies the conditions for basic seed; (c) intended for purposes other than the production of cereal seed.
Crop and seed requirements 15.—(1) Crop inspections by official or licensed crop inspectors must be carried out in accordance with Article 3(3)(A) of, and Annex I to, Council Directive 66/402/EEC on the marketing of cereal seed(a), and the crop must satisfy the conditions in that Annex.
(2) The seed produced by the crop must be sampled in accordance with Article 7 of, and Annex I to, that Directive and must satisfy the conditions in Annex II to that Directive.
(3) The moisture content must not exceed 17% by weight.
(a) OJ No L 125, 11.7.1966, p. 2309 as last amended by Commission Directive 2009/74/EC (OJ No L 166, 27.6.2009, p. 40.
19


---
(4) Diseases and harmful organisms that reduce the usefulness of the seed must be at the lowest possible level.
CHAPTER 2 Higher voluntary standards Higher voluntary standards for cereals 16.—(1)Barley, oats, wheat (including durum wheat and spelt wheat) or naked oats classified as basic seed, or certified seed of categories C1 or C2, may be marketed as being of a higher voluntary standard, which is a standard higher than that regulated under chapter 1, if it meets the higher standards in this chapter.
(2) The crop must have at least 99.99% (by number) species purity.
(3) Other than a hybrid, the minimum varietal purity of seed is— (a) 99.95% for basic seed; (b) 99.9% for C1 seed; (c) 99.7% for C2 seed.
(4) In the case of C1 and C2 the seed must have 99% by weight analytical purity.
Additional requirements for barley, wheat, durum wheat and spelt wheat 17. In the case of barley, wheat, durum wheat and spelt wheat— (a) the maximum number of wild oats in a crop is 7 per hectare.
(b) the maximum percentage by number of loose smut infection in seed is— (i) 0.1% for basic seed; (ii) 0.2% for C1 and C2 seed.
Seed from other plants 18. The number of seeds from other plant species in a sample of 1000g must not exceed the following.
Seed of other species Category of All other plant Other cereal All plant Wild oats or Wild radish, seed sampled species species species other darnel corn cockle, (including than cereals sterile brome species or couch specified in columns 3 to 6) Basic seed 1 0 1 0 0(a) C1 2 1 1 0 1 C2 4 3 2 0 1 (a) Only in respect of wild radish and corn cockle.
Ergot and sclerotia 19. In a sample of 1000g— (a) in the case of basic seed there must be no ergot or sclerotia; (b) in the case of certified seed (C1 or C2) there must be no more than one piece of ergot or sclerotia.
20


---
PART 3 Fodder plants CHAPTER 1 Basic standards Scope of Part 3 20. This Part regulates the types of fodder plants in Schedule 1.
Permitted types of fodder seed 21.—(1) Fodder seed must be— (a) pre-basic seed; (b) basic seed; (c) certified seed; (d) certified seed, first generation; (e) certified seed, second generation; (f) commercial seed; or (g) seed of a higher voluntary standard.
(2) The seed may be a mixture of fodder species of different varieties provided that each variety in the mixture is certified.
Meaning of "pre-basic seed" 22. Pre-basic seed is seed— (a) produced from a generation prior to pre-basic seed by or under the responsibility of the breeder according to well-defined practices for the maintenance of the variety; and (b) intended for the production of (i) more pre-basic seed; (ii) basic seed; or (i) with the breeder’s written authority, certified seed CS, C1 or C2.
Meaning of "basic seed" 23.—(1) Basic seed is seed of— (a) bred varieties; or (b) local varieties.
(2) Seed of bred varieties is seed— (a) produced under the responsibility of the breeder according to well-defined practices for the maintenance of the variety; (b) intended for the production of certified seed.
(3) Seed of local varieties is seed— (a) produced under official control from material officially accepted as being of the local variety on one or more holdings situated within a clearly demarcated region of origin; (b) intended for the production of certified seed.
21


---
Meaning of "certified seed" 24. Certified seed is seed (other than of field beans, field peas, lupins and vetches)— (a) produced directly from basic seed or, if the breeder so requests, from pre-basic seed that satisfies the conditions for basic seed; and (b) intended for purposes other than the production of seed.
Meaning of "certified seed, first generation" 25. Certified seed, first generation in relation to field beans, field peas, lucerne (Medicago sativa), lupins and vetches is seed— (a) produced directly from basic seed or, if the breeder so requests, from pre-basic seed that satisfies the conditions for basic seed; and (b) intended for— (i) the production of certified seed, second generation (in the case of field beans and field peas only); or (ii) purposes other than the production of seed (in all cases).
Meaning of "certified seed, second generation" 26. Certified seed, second generation in relation to field beans, field peas, lucerne (Medicago sativa), lupins and vetches is seed— (a) produced directly from basic seed, from certified seed, first generation (C1) or, if the breeder so requests, from pre-basic seed that satisfies the conditions for basic seed; and (b) intended for purposes other than the production of seed of fodder plants.
Meaning of "commercial seed" 27. Commercial seed is seed of annual meadowgrass, Hungarian vetch or sainfoin that is identifiable as belonging to a species.
Crop and seed requirements 28.—(1) Crop inspections by official or licensed crop inspectors must be carried out in accordance with Annex I to Council Directive 66/401/EEC on the marketing of fodder plant seed(a), and the crop must satisfy the conditions in that Annex.
(2) The seed produced by the crop must be sampled in accordance with Annex I to that Directive, and must satisfy the conditions in Annex II to that Directive.
(3) Diseases and harmful organisms that reduce the usefulness of the seed must be at the lowest possible level.
CHAPTER 2 Higher voluntary standards Higher voluntary standards for fodder seed 29. In the case of cocksfoot, festulolium, hybrid ryegrass. Italian ryegrass, Lucerne, meadow fescue, perennial ryegrass, red clover, red fescue, sainfoin, small timothy, timothy, smooth stalked meadow grass, tall fescue, and white clover, certified seed (CS) may be marketed as certified seed of a higher voluntary standard.
(a) OJ No L 125, 11.7.1966, p. 2298 as last amended by Commission Directive 2009/74/EC (OJ No L 166, 27.6.2009, p. 40.
22


---
Minimum standards for purity and other species of seed in the sample 30. The sample taken under paragraph 28(2) for the purposes of Council Directive 66/401/EEC must have the minimum standards set out in the following table.
23


---
24 seiceps cificeps rehto fo stimiL fo deeS fo deeS fo deeS latoT latoT muminiM redaeh nmuloC ssargkcalb hcuoc pps xemuR fo thgiew lla fo thgiew lacitylana R gnidulcxe elgnis a rehto ytirup allesoteca rehto seiceps yb %( R dna seiceps yb %( )thgiew sumitiram yb %( thgiew thgiew sessarg eniF 0 01 0 0 5.1 89 muilolutsef sdees ruof naht erom on evah tsum elpmas ehT 01 01 5 5.0 5.1 59 eucsef der hguor %3.0 dna eucsef wodaem ,toofskcoc ,ssargeyr ssarg wodaem deklats wodaem rehto fo dees fo thgiew yb %4.0 fo mumixaM 3 3 2 5.0 5.1 09 deklats-htooms ssarg ssargwodaem sessarg reddoF 01 01 5 5.0 5.1 09 toofskcoc ssargeyr %3.0 ,ssarg wodaem deklats hguor %3.0 01 01 5 5.0 5.1 89 eucsef llat ,eucsef wodaem wodaem deklats hguor%3.0 ,ssargwodaem launna %4.0 01 01 5 5.0 5.1 89 nailatI ,ssargeyr dirbyh ssarg lainnerep ,ssargeyr ssargeyr pps sitsorgA %3.0 01 01 4 5.0 5.1 89 yhtomit ,yhtomit llams semugel dedees llamS pps sutotileM %3.0 01 01 01 5.0 5.1 89 etihw ,revolc der ,enrecul revolc pps sutotileM %3.0 01 01 5 5.0 5.1 89 ,niofnias


---
PART 4 Oil and fibre Scope of Part 4 31. This Part regulates the types of oil and fibre plants in Schedule 1.
Permitted types of oil and fibre seed 32. Oil and fibre seed must be— (a) pre-basic seed; (b) basic seed; (c) certified seed; (d) certified seed, first generation; (e) certified seed, second generation; (f) certified seed, third generation; or (g) commercial seed.
Meaning of "pre-basic seed" 33.—(1) "Pre-basic seed" is seed of a generation prior to basic seed— (a) that has been produced by or under the responsibility of the breeder according to welldefined practices for the maintenance of the variety, and (b) intended to be used for the production of more pre-basic seed, basic seed, or with the breeder’s written authority— (i) in the case of black mustard, brown mustard, dioecious hemp, sunflower, swede rape, turnip rape or white mustard, CS seed; (ii) in the case of monoecious hemp or soya bean, C1 or C2 seed; (i) in the case of flax or linseed, C1, C2 or C3 seed.
(2) But in relation to a component of a hybrid variety, "pre-basic seed" means seed of a generation prior to basic seed that is intended to be used for the production of— (a) more pre-basic seed; (b) basic seed; or (c) with the breeder’s written authority, CS seed.
Meaning of "basic seed" for non-hybrid varieties 34. In the case of a non-hybrid variety, basic seed is seed— (a) produced under the responsibility of the breeder according to well-defined practices for the maintenance of the variety; (b) intended for the production of— (i) certified seed, (ii) certified seed, first generation, (i) certified seed, second generation; or (iv) certified seed, third generation.
25


---
Meaning of "basic seed" for inbred lines 35. In the case of an inbred line, basic seed is seed of an inbred line of a hybrid that satisfies the conditions for basic seed.
Meaning of "basic seed" for simple hybrids 36. In the case of a simple hybrid, basic seed is seed intended for the production of hybrids.
Meaning of "certified seed" 37. Certified seed is seed of black, brown and white mustard, dioecious hemp, sunflower. swede rape or turnip rape— (a) produced directly from basic seed or, if the breeder so requests, from seed of a generation prior to basic seed that satisfies the conditions for basic seed; (b) intended for purposes other than the production of seed of oil or fibre plants.
Meaning of "certified seed, first generation" 38. Certified seed, first generation is seed of monoecious hemp, flax, linseed or soya— (a) produced directly from basic seed or, if the breeder so requests, from pre-basic seed that satisfies the conditions for basic seed; (b) intended either for the production of— (i) certified seed, second generation; (ii) where appropriate, certified seed, third generation; or (i) for purposes other than the production of seed of oil or fibre plants.
Meaning of "certified seed, second generation" 39.—(1) Certified seed, second generation is seed of flax, linseed, soya or monoecious hemp.
(2) In the case of flax, linseed, soya, it is seed— (a) produced directly from basic seed, from certified seed of the first generation or, if the breeder so requests, from pre-basic seed that satisfies the conditions for basic seed; and (b) intended for— (i) purposes other than the production of seed or, (ii) where appropriate, the production of certified seed, third generation seed.
(3) In the case of monoecious hemp it is seed— (a) produced directly from certified seed of the first generation established and officially controlled with a view to the production of certified seed of the second generation; and (b) intended for the production of hemp to be harvested in flower.
Meaning of "certified seed, third generation" 40. Certified seed, third generation is seed from flax or linseed— (a) of direct descent from basic seed, from certified seed of the first or second generation or, if the breeder so requests, from seed of a generation prior to basic seed; and (b) intended for purposes other than the production of seed.
Meaning of "commercial seed" 41. Commercial seed (black mustard seed only) is seed that is identifiable as belonging to a species.
26


---
Crop and seed requirements 42.—(1) Crop inspections by official or licensed crop inspectors must be carried out in accordance with Article 2(3)(A) of, and Annex I to, Council Directive 2002/57/EEC on the marketing of seed and fibre plants(a), and the crop must satisfy the conditions in that Annex.
(2) The seed produced by the crop must be sampled in accordance with Annex I to that Directive and must satisfy the conditions in Annex II to that Directive.
(3) Diseases and harmful organisms that reduce the usefulness of the seed must be at the lowest possible level.
Requirements for a varietal association 43.—(1) Seed marketed as a varietal association must comply with this paragraph.
(2) The varietal association must be an association of certified CS seed of a specified pollinatordependant hybrid variety with certified CS seed of one or more specified pollinator varieties both of which have been accepted on to the United Kingdom National List or the Common Catalogue.
(3) The seed of the female and male components of a varietal association must have been dressed using seed dressings of different colours.
(4) The seed must be mechanically combined in the proportions jointly determined by the persons responsible for the maintenance of these components.
(5) The proportions must be notified to the Secretary of State by the person responsible for the maintenance of the pollinator-dependent hybrid and pollinators with the varietal association.
(6) In this paragraph— (a) "pollinator-dependent hybrid" means the male-sterile component within the varietal association (female component); (b) "pollinator" means a component shedding pollen within a varietal association.
PART 5 Vegetables Scope of Part 5 44. This Part regulates the types of vegetables in Schedule 1.
Permitted types of vegetable seed 45.—(1) Vegetable seed must be— (a) pre-basic seed; (b) basic seed; (c) certified seed; or (d) standard seed.
(2) The seed may be a mixture of different varieties of lettuce seed or radish seed provided that each variety in the mixture is standard seed.
Meaning of "pre-basic seed" 46. Pre-basic seed is seed— (a) OJ No L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 74 as last amended by Commission Directive 2009/7/EC, OJ No L 166, 27.6.2009, p. 40.
27


---
(a) produced from a generation prior to pre-basic seed by or under the responsibility of the breeder according to well-defined practices for the maintenance of the variety; and (b) intended for the production of— (i) more pre-basic seed; (ii) basic seed; or (i) with the breeder’s written authority, certified seed.
Meaning of "basic seed" 47.—(1) Basic seed is seed— (a) produced under the responsibility of the breeder according to well-defined practices for the maintenance of the variety; (b) intended for the production of certified seed.
(2) For the avoidance of doubt this includes seeds intended as a component of a hybrid variety of vegetable.
Meaning of "certified seed" 48. Certified seed is seed— (a) produced directly from basic seed or, if the breeder so requests, from seed of a generation prior to basic seed that satisfies the conditions for basic seed; (b) intended mainly for the production of vegetables.
Meaning of "standard seed" 49. Standard seed is seed that is intended mainly for the production of vegetables and has been approved by the Secretary of State as having sufficient varietal purity and varietal identity.
Crop and seed requirements 50.—(1) Crop inspections by official or licensed crop inspectors must be carried out in accordance with Article 2(3)(A) of, and Annex I to, Council Directive 2002/55/EEC on the marketing of vegetable seed(a), and the crop must satisfy the conditions in that Annex.
(2) The seed produced by the crop must be sampled in accordance with Article 25 of, and Annex I to, that Directive and must satisfy the conditions in Annex II to that Directive.
(3) Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply in the case of standard seed.
(4) Diseases and harmful organisms that reduce the usefulness of the seed must be at the lowest possible level.
(5) After marketing, vegetable seed is subject to control by the Secretary of State for varietal identity and varietal purity.
(a) OJ No L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 33 as last amended by Commission Decision 2009/145/EC. OJ No L 312, 27.11.2009, p. 44.
28


---
SCHEDULE 3 Regulations 16 and 17 Labelling and loose sales CONTENTS PART 1 Introduction 1. Types of label 2. Time of labelling 3. Genetically modified varieties 4. Chemical treatment of seed PART 2 Official labels 5. Official labels: general requirements 6. Official labels for pre-basic seed 7. Official labels for basic seed and certified seed 8. Official labels for commercial seed not certified as to variety 9. Labelling mixtures PART 3 Additional requirements for official labels for specific species 10. Introduction 11. Additional requirements for beet seed 12. Additional requirements for cereal seed 13. Additional requirements for fodder seed 14. Additional requirements for oil and fibre seed PART 4 Supplier’s labels 15. Meaning of "supplier’s label" 16. Labelling a package 17. References to weights in this Part 18. Breeder’s seed: supplier’s labels 19. Beet seed: supplier’s labels 20. Cereal seed: supplier’s labels 21. Fodder seed (agricultural or amenity): packages that may be labelled with a supplier’s label 22. Fodder seed other than a mixture: labelling requirements 23. Fodder seed mixture: labelling requirements 24. Oil and fibre seed: supplier’s labels 25. Vegetable seed: supplier’s labels 29


---
PART 5 Sales of loose seed 26. Sales of loose seed PART 1 Introduction Types of label 1.—(1) There are two types of label for seed, official labels and supplier’s labels.
(2) A supplier’s label must be used on a package of breeder’s seed, and may be used on a small package of seed specified in Part 3 of this Schedule and on a package of standard vegetable seed of any size.
(3) An official label must be used on any other package of seed.
Time of labelling 2. A package must be labelled at the time of sealing.
Genetically modified varieties 3. If a variety has been genetically modified, this must be stated on the label.
Chemical treatment of seed 4. If seed has been subjected to any chemical treatment, this fact and the nature of the treatment or the proprietary name of the chemical used must be stated on the label.
PART 2 Official labels Official labels: general requirements 5.—(1) An official label is a label supplied by the Secretary of State.
(2) It must be on the outside of the package.
(3) It must not have been previously used.
(4) It must be adhesive, or secured by a sealing device approved by the Secretary of State.
(5) It must be in one of the official languages of the European Union.
(6) It must be at least 110 mm x 67 mm.
(7) It must have a unique number.
(8) It must be fixed to the package by an authorised officer of the Secretary of State, a licensed seed sampler or any person being supervised by such a person.
(9) By way of derogation from the above, in the case of cereal seed, fodder seed and oil and fibre seed, classified in each case as CS, C1, C2 or C3, the whole bag may be used as the label, provided that this is done with the approval of the Secretary of State and the bag is the same colour as is required for the label.
30


---
Official labels for pre-basic seed 6.—(1) The following must appear on an official label on pre-basic seed— (a) the name of the certification authority; (b) the name or initials of the member State; (c) the reference number of the seed lot; (d) the country of production; (e) the month and year of sealing expressed as "sealed …" (month and year); (f) the species (this must be the botanical name, which may be given in abridged form and without the authors’ names, except that, in the case of beet or vegetable seed, the common name may be used); (g) the variety; (h) the description "pre-basic" or "PB"; (i) the declared net or gross weight or number of seeds (or, in the case of beet, the declared number of clusters or pure seed); (j) where granulated pesticides, pelleting substances or other solid additives are used, the nature of the additive and the approximate ratio between the weight of the seed and the total weight (or, in the case of beet, the ratio between the weight of pure seed and the total weight; (k) the number of generations preceding the category "certified seed (CS) " or "certified first generation (C1) seed".
(2) The label must be white with a diagonal violet stripe.
Official labels for basic seed and certified seed 7.—(1) The following must appear on an official label on certified seed— (a) the words "EC Rules and standards"; (b) the name of the certification authority; (c) the name or initials of the member State; (d) the reference number of the seed lot; (e) either— (i) the month and year of sealing expressed as "sealed …" (month and year); or (ii) the month and year of the last official sampling for the purposes of certification expressed as "sampled …" (month and year); (f) the species (this must be the botanical name, either in full or in abridged form except that, in the case of beet or vegetable seed, where the common name may be used); (g) the variety; (h) the category; (i) the country of production; (j) the declared net or gross weight or number of seeds or in the case of beet the declared number of clusters of pure seed; (k) where granulated pesticides, pelleting substances or other solid additives are used, the nature of the additive and the approximate ratio between the weight of the seed and the total weight (or, in the case of beet, the ratio between the weight of pure seed and the total weight; (l) where the germination has been retested the word "retested" followed by the month and year of re-testing.
(2) The label must be coloured— 31


---
(a) white for basic seed; (b) blue for certified seed and certified seed of the first generation; (c) red for certified seed of the second and third generation.
Official labels for commercial seed not certified as to variety 8.—(1)The following must appear on an official label on commercial seed not certified as to variety— (a) the words "EC Rules and standards"; (b) the name of the certification authority; (c) the name or initials of the member State; (d) the reference number of the seed lot; (e) either— (i) the month and year of sealing expressed as "sealed …" (month and year); or (ii) the month and year of the last official sampling for the purposes of certification expressed as "sampled …" (month and year); (f) the species (this must be the botanical name, either in full or in abridged form except that, in the case of beet or vegetable seed, where the common name may be used); (g) the words "commercial seed not certified as to variety"; (h) the country or region of production; (i) the declared net or gross weight or number of seeds; (j) where granulated pesticides, pelleting substances or other solid additives are used, the nature of the additive and the approximate ratio between the weight of the seed and the total weight; (k) where the germination has been retested the word "retested" followed by the month and year of re-testing.
(2) The label must be coloured brown.
Labelling mixtures 9.—(1) The following must appear on an official label on a mixture of seed— (a) the authority responsible for sealing the package; (b) the name or initials of the member State; (c) the reference number of the seed lot; (d) the month and year of sealing expressed as "sealed . . . ." (month and year); (e) the species, category, variety, country of production and proportion by weight of each of the components; (f) the declared net or gross weight, or declared number of seeds; (g) where the weight is indicated and granulated, pelleting substances or other solid additives are used, the nature of the additive and the approximate ratio between the weight of the pure seed and the total weight; (h) where the germination of all the components of the mixture has been retested, the word "retested" followed by the month and year of re-testing; (i) in the case of cereals the words "mixture of " followed by the species and varieties and a qualifying statement that the mixture is effective against the propagation of a harmful organism; (j) in the case of fodder plants the words "mixture of seeds for" followed by an indication of the intended use.
32


---
(2) But for fodder mixtures registered with the Secretary of State, provided the label shows the registered name of the mixture, the percentage by weight of each of the components may be omitted provided that— (a) this information is supplied to the customer on request, and (b) customers are informed that they can request these details.
(3) The label must be coloured green.
PART 3 Additional requirements for official labels for specific species Introduction 10. The following requirements for specific species are in addition to the requirements in Part 2.
Additional requirements for beet seed 11. An official label for beet seed must specify— (a) "monogerm" or "precision" as appropriate; (b) "fodder beet" or "sugar beet" as appropriate.
Additional requirements for cereal seed 12.—(1) An official label for C1 and C2 naked barley must include the words "minimum germination capacity 75%".
(2) An official label for basic cereal seed of varieties that are hybrids or inbred lines must include— (a) for basic seed where the hybrid or inbred line to which the seed belongs has been accepted on the United Kingdom National List or the Common Catalogue, the name under which it has been officially accepted, with or without reference to the final variety, and if the seed is intended solely as a component for final varieties the word "component"; (b) for basic seed in other cases the name of the component to which the basic seed belongs, which may be given in code form, accompanied by a reference to the final variety, with or without reference to its function (male or female) by the word "component".
(3) An official label for certified cereal seed (CS, C1 or C2) of varieties that are hybrids or inbred lines must include the word "hybrid" after the variety.
(4) Where seed is marketed as being of the higher voluntary standard the label must contain the letters HVS.
Additional requirements for fodder seed 13. An official label for fodder seed must include— (a) for certified seed, second and subsequent generations, the number of generations after basic seed; (b) in the case of seed of grass varieties in respect of which no official examination of their value for cultivation and use has been carried out the words "Not intended for fodder production"; (c) where seed is marketed at the higher voluntary standard the letters HVS.
33


---
Additional requirements for oil and fibre seed 14.—(1) An official label for basic oil and fibre seed of varieties that are hybrids or inbred lines must include— (a) for basic seed where the hybrid or inbred line to which the seed belongs has been officially accepted on to the United Kingdom National List or the Common Catalogue, the name under which it has been officially accepted, with or without reference to the final variety, and if the seed is intended solely as a component for final varieties the word "component"; (b) for basic seed in other cases the name of the component to which the basic seed belongs, which may be given in code form, accompanied by a reference to the final variety, with or without reference to its function (male or female) by the word "component".
(2) An official label for certified oil and fibre seed (CS, C1 or C2) of varieties that are hybrids or inbred lines must include the word "hybrid" after the variety.
(3) An official label for certified seed of a varietal association must be blue with a diagonal green line.
PART 4 Supplier’s labels Meaning of "supplier’s label" 15. A supplier’s label is a label that has not been provided by the Secretary of State.
Labelling a package 16. A supplier’s label must either be attached to the package in the same way as an official label or printed indelibly on the package.
References to weights in this Part 17. In this Part references to the weight excludes any granulated pesticides, pelleting substances or other solid additives.
Breeder’s seed: supplier’s labels 18.—(1) The following must appear on a supplier’s label on a package of breeder’s seed— (a) the name, address and registration number of the supplier responsible for attaching the label; (b) the reference number of the seed lot; (c) the species; (d) the variety; (e) the words "breeder’s seed"; (f) the declared net or gross weight or number of seeds.
(2) The label must be buff-coloured.
Beet seed: supplier’s labels 19.—(1) A supplier’s label may be used on a small package of beet seed.
(2) A small package of beet seed (known as a "small EC package") is a package that— 34


---
(a) in the case of basic and certified beet seed of precision or monogerm varieties, either weighs not more than 2.5 kg or consists of not more than 100,000 clusters; (b) for all other beet seed weighs not more than 10kg.
(3) The label must be the same colour as the official label for that category of seed.
(4) The following must appear on the label— (a) the words "Small EC package"; (b) the name, address and identification number of the person affixing the label; (c) the serial number; (d) the service that assigned the serial number; (e) the name or initials of the member State; (f) the reference number if the official serial number does not enable the lot to be identified; (g) the species; (h) either sugar beet or fodder beet as appropriate; (i) the variety; (j) the category; (k) the net or gross weight or number of clusters or pure seeds; (l) where weight is indicated and granulated pesticides, pelleting substances or other solid additives are used, the nature of the additive and also the approximate ratio between the weight of clusters or pure seeds and the total weight; (m) either "monogerm" or "precision" as appropriate.
Cereal seed: supplier’s labels 20.—(1) A supplier’s label may be used on a small package of cereal seed.
(2) A small package of cereal seed is a package of any certified seed, or any mixture of certified seed, not exceeding 15kg.
(3) The label must be the same colour as the official label for that category of seed.
(4) The following must appear on the label— (a) the words "EC rules and standards"; (b) the name and address and registration number of the supplier responsible for affixing the label; (c) the reference number of the seed lot; (d) the species; (e) the variety; (f) the category; (g) the declared net weight or declared number of seeds; (h) for hybrid varieties of maize, the word "hybrid"; (i) in the case of C1 and C2 seed of naked barley, the words "minimum germination capacity 75%".
Fodder seed (agricultural or amenity): packages that may be labelled with a supplier’s label 21.—(1) A supplier’s label may be used on a small package of fodder seed, either agricultural or amenity (including a mixture of fodder seed).
(2) A small package of fodder seed is either a small EC ‘A’ package or a small EC ‘B’ package.
(3) A small EC ‘A’ package is a package containing a mixture of seed not intended for the production of fodder plants, with a net weight not exceeding 2 kg.
35


---
(4) A small EC ‘B’ package is a package containing— (a) basic seed, (b) certified seed (CS, C1 or C2), (c) commercial seed, or (d) (unless the package is a small EC ‘A’ package) a mixture of seed, with a net weight not exceeding 10 kg.
Fodder seed other than a mixture: labelling requirements 22.—(1) A supplier’s label on a small package of fodder seed (other than a mixture, for which see paragraph 23) must be the same colour as the official label for that category of seed.
(2) The following must appear on the label— (a) the words "small EC ‘B’ package"; (b) the name, address and identification number of the person affixing the label; (c) the serial number; (d) the reference number if the serial number does not enable the seed lot to be identified; (e) the species; (f) the net or gross weight of pure seed or the number of pure seeds; (g) where granulated pesticides, pelleting substances or other solid additives are used, the nature of the additive and also the approximate ratio between the weight of the seed and the total weight; (h) in the case of certified seed— (i) the variety; (ii) the category; (i) for grass seed of a variety for which an examination of its value for cultivation and use is not required the words "not intended for the production of fodder plants"; (i) in the case of commercial seed the words "commercial seed".
Fodder seed mixture: labelling requirements 23.—(1) A supplier’s label on small package of a mixture of fodder seed must be the same colour as the official label for that category of seed.
(2) The following must appear on the label— (a) the words "small EC ‘A’ package" or "small EC ‘B’ package" as appropriate; (b) the name, address and identification number of the person affixing the label; (c) for a small EC ‘A’ package— (i) the reference number enabling the seed lots used in the mixture to be identified; (ii) the name or initials of the member State; (d) for a small EC ‘B’ package— (i) the officially assigned serial number; (ii) the person that assigned the serial number; (i) the name or initials of the member State; (iv) the reference number if the official serial number does not enable the used seed lots to be identified; (e) the words "Seed-mixture for … (intended use)"; (f) the net or gross weight or number of pure seeds; 36


---
(g) where granulated pesticides, pelleting substances or other solid additives are used, the nature of the additive and also the approximate ratio between the weight of the seed and the total weight; (h) the percentage by weight of the various components shown by species and, where appropriate, by variety.
(3) But for mixtures registered with the Secretary of State, provided the label shows the registered name of the mixture, the percentage by weight of each of the components may be omitted provided that— (a) this information is supplied to the customer on request; and (b) customers are informed that they can request these details.
Oil and fibre seed: supplier’s labels 24.—(1) A supplier’s label may be used on a small package of oil and fibre seed.
(2) A small package of oil and fibre seed is a package of any certified or commercial oil and fibre seed that does not weigh more than 15 kg.
(3) The label must be the same colour as the official label for that category of seed.
(4) The following must appear on the label— (a) the words "EC Rules and standards"; (b) the name and address and registration number of the supplier responsible for affixing the label; (c) the reference number of the seed lot; (d) the species (this must be the botanical name, either in full or in abridged form); (e) the variety; (f) for certified seed, the category; (g) for commercial seed the words "commercial seed (not certified as to variety)"; (h) the declared net or gross weight of clusters of pure seeds (except for packages not exceeding 500 grams); (i) where granulated pesticides, pelleting substances or other solid additives are used, the nature of the additive and also the approximate ratio between the weight of the seed and the total weight.
Vegetable seed: supplier’s labels 25.—(1) A supplier’s label may be used on— (a) a package of standard vegetable seed, no matter what the weight, and (b) a small package of certified (CS) seed.
(2) A small package of certified (CS) vegetable seed is a package of certified (CS) seed that weighs no more than— (a) for legumes, 5kg; (b) for asparagus, beetroot, carrot, chard or spinach beet, gourd, marrow, onion, radish, spinach or turnip, 500grams; (c) for any other vegetable species, 100 grams; (d) for a mixture of different varieties of standard seed of lettuce or radish, 50 grams.
(3) The label must be coloured dark yellow for standard seed or blue for certified seed.
(4) The following must appear on the label— (a) the words "EC rules and standards"; (b) the name, address and identification number of the person affixing the label; 37


---
(c) the marketing year of the sealing or of the last examination of germination (the end of the marketing year may be indicated); (d) the species; (e) the variety; (f) the category: in the case of small packages, certified seed may be marked with the letter ‘C’ or ‘Z’ and standard seed with the letters ‘ST’; (g) in the case of standard seed, the reference number given by the person responsible for affixing the labels; (h) in the case of certified seed the reference number enabling the certified lot to be identified; (i) the declared net or gross weight or declared number of seeds, except for small packages of up to 500 grams; (j) where weight is indicated and granulated pesticides, pelleting substances or other solid additives are used, the nature of the additive and also the approximate ratio between the weight of clusters of pure seeds and the total weight.
PART 5 Sales of loose seed Sales of loose seed 26.—(1) Loose (unpackaged) seed may be sold in accordance with this paragraph.
(2) The maximum quantity that may be sold is— (a) for fodder seed— (i) 3kg in the case of field beans and peas; (ii) 2kg in the case of all other fodder seed; (i) 7kg in the case of a mixture of seed; (b) for cereal seed, 5kg; (c) for beet seed, 2.5 kg; (d) for oil and fibre seed, 5 kg; (e) for vegetable seed— (i) 3kg in the case of legumes; (ii) 1kg in the case of all other vegetable seed.
(3) The sale must be to the final consumer, and the information that would have been required on a package of that seed must be displayed near the point of sale.
SCHEDULE 4 Regulations 9 and 16 Exceptions CONTENTS PART 1 Supply of seed other than by way of marketing 1. Early multiplication of seed 38


---
2. Seed as grown 3. Farm saved seed PART 2 Marketing seed that does not comply with Schedule 2 4. Seed with a declared lower germination 5. Early movement of seed 6. Tetrazolium testing for cereal seed 7. Marketing agricultural conservation varieties 8. Marketing preservation mixtures that include uncertified fodder seed 9. Marketing unlisted varieties (other than vegetable seed) for tests and trials 10. Marketing unlisted varieties of vegetable seed 11. Marketing for scientific or selection purposes 12. Restrictions relating to genetically modified seed 13. Marketing imported seed to be labelled as HVS 14. Marketing seed certified in another member State PART 3 Certifying seed that does not fully comply with these Regulations 15. Seed not finally certified, harvested in another member State 16. Seed harvested in a third country 17. Marketing extensions PART 1 Supply of seed other than by way of marketing Early multiplication of seed 1.—(1) Seed of an unlisted variety may be supplied by a person licensed to market seed for multiplication for progression through the different generation categories of seed.
(2) Each generation of seed supplied must have reached the standard required for certification.
(3) The seed produced must remain the property of the licensed person, and may not be marketed.
Seed as grown 2. Seed as grown may be sent by the grower for cleaning prior to certification, and to a testing or inspection body for the purposes of certification.
Farm saved seed 3. Farm-saved seed may only be used by the person who grew it, and may not be marketed or supplied to any other person, but it may be sent for cleaning provided that the person who cleans it returns all the seed to the holding where it was grown.
39


---
PART 2 Marketing seed that does not comply with Schedule 2 Seed with a declared lower germination 4.—(1) Pre-basic and basic seed with a minimum percentage germination standard lower than required in the Directive relating to that seed specified in Schedule 2 may be marketed provided that the supplier guarantees a specific minimum percentage germination.
(2) The germination must be stated on the official label together with the supplier’s name and address and the reference number of the seed lot.
Early movement of seed 5.—(1) To ensure the early availability of seed, pre-basic, basic and certified seed may be marketed before the official germination result has been received if— (a) a seed test report has been issued under these Regulations, indicating that the seed has achieved the required minimum analytical purity standard set out in the Directive relating to that seed specified in Schedule 2, and (b) the supplier guarantees the minimum germination for that seed.
(2) This does not apply in the case of— (a) vegetable seed; or (b) seed imported from a third country.
Tetrazolium testing for cereal seed 6. Cereal seed may be marketed if it has been subjected to a tetrazolium test approved by the Secretary of State to establish the viability of the seed instead of the tests specified in Council Directive 66/402/EEC on the marketing of cereal seed(a).
Marketing agricultural conservation varieties 7.—(1) The Secretary of State may authorise the marketing of an agricultural conservation variety of seed in accordance with this paragraph.
(2) The seed must be listed as an agricultural conservation variety in the United Kingdom National List.
(3) The seed must be produced from a crop grown in the region of origin specified for the variety in the United Kingdom National List or as authorised by the Secretary of State.
(4) The seed may only be marketed and used in the stated region of origin.
(5) The Secretary of State may limit the total amount of seed authorised in any given year.
(6) The seed must descend from seed produced according to well defined practices for maintenance of the variety.
(7) The seed must comply with the requirements for certification of certified seed provided for in the Directive relating to that seed specified in Schedule 2 with the exception of the requirements in respect of minimum varietal purity and examination.
(8) The seed must have sufficient varietal purity.
(9) The label must contain the words "conservation variety" in addition to the other labelling requirements in these Regulations, but the label must be brown rather than as specified in Schedule 2.
(a) OJ No L 125, 11.7.1966, p. 2309 as last amended by Commission Directive 2009/74/EC, OJ No L 166, 27.6.2009, p. 40.
40


---
Marketing preservation mixtures that include uncertified fodder seed 8.—(1) The Secretary of State may authorise the marketing of a preservation mixture of uncertified fodder species to which these Regulations apply (whether or not the mixture also contains seed to which these Regulations do not apply) if satisfied the mixture contains only seed of native plants and that using the seed will assist in the conservation of a genetic resource, avoid loss of genetic diversity or natural habitat and improve species distribution.
(2) An authorisation— (a) may only be granted if the preservation mixture comprises exclusively of seed native to England; (b) may specify the amount of seed that may be marketed under it; (c) may impose conditions relating to the retention and production of samples of the preservation mixture; (d) must specify the natural environments and the regions in England for which the mixture is suitable; (e) must impose conditions relating to— (i) the keeping and production of records in respect of the collection, preparation and marketing of the preservation mixture; and (ii) labelling for the purposes of ensuring proper identification and traceability of the seed.
(3) It must be have a pink supplier’s label.
Marketing unlisted varieties (other than vegetable seed) for tests and trials 9.—(1) The Secretary of State may authorise the marketing of seed for which an application for entry in the United Kingdom National List has been submitted but not yet granted.
(2) This paragraph does not apply in relation to vegetable seed (for which see the following paragraph).
(3) An applicant must be a producer established in England.
(4) An authorisation is valid for one year and is renewable.
(5) An authorisation becomes invalid once the variety is added to the United Kingdom National List or the application to be listed is withdrawn or rejected.
(6) The authorisation may only be requested by the person who has submitted an application for entry of the varieties concerned in the United Kingdom National List.
(7) An authorisation may only be granted for tests or trials carried out at agricultural enterprises to gather information on the cultivation or use of the variety.
(8) The quantities authorised for each variety must not exceed the following percentages of seed of the same species used annually in the United Kingdom— (a) in the case of durum wheat: 0.05 %, (b) in the case of field pea, field bean, oats, barley and wheat: 0.3 %, (c) in all other cases: 0.1 %, except that, if such quantities are not sufficient to sow 10 hectares, the quantity needed for such an area may be authorised.
(9) Fodder plant seed must comply with the conditions for— (a) certified seed (all species other than field peas and field beans); or (b) certified seed, second generation (field peas and field beans).
(10) Cereal seed must comply with the conditions for— (a) certified seed (rye, maize and hybrids of oats and red oats, barley, wheat, durum wheat, spelt wheat and triticale other than self-pollinating varieties); or 41


---
(b) certified seed, second generation oats and red oats, barley, wheat, durum wheat, spelt wheat and self-pollinating varieties of triticale, other than hybrids in each case.
(11) Beet seed must comply with the conditions for certified seed.
(12) Seed of oil and fibre plants must comply with the conditions for— (a) certified seed (all species other than flax and linseed); (b) certified seed, second and third generation (flax and linseed).
(13) The package must be labelled with an orange label which must include the words "variety not yet officially listed; for tests and trials only" and, where applicable "genetically modified variety" in addition to the other labelling requirements in these Regulations.
Marketing unlisted varieties of vegetable seed 10.—(1) For the purpose of gaining knowledge and practical experience of a variety during cultivation, the Secretary of State may authorise the marketing of vegetable seed not listed on the United Kingdom National List provided an application has been made for entry into the National List of at least one member State.
(2) An authorisation is valid for one year and is renewable twice for a period not exceeding one year at each renewal.
(3) There are no quantitative restrictions on the amount that may be authorised.
(4) The authorisation may only be requested by the person who has submitted an application for entry of the varieties concerned on to the relevant National List.
(5) The package must have an orange label and include the words "Variety not yet officially listed" in addition to the other labelling requirements of these Regulations (except that the name of the certifying authority and the country of origin need not appear).
(6) The person marketing the seed must— (a) retain a sample of each seed lot marketed and keep it for at least two years; (b) record for each sale the name and address of the buyer and keep the record for at least three years.
Marketing for scientific or selection purposes 11.—(1) The Secretary of State may authorise a producer to place on the market small quantities of seed (other than vegetable seed) for scientific or selection purposes.
(2) The Secretary of State may grant an authorisation whether or not the variety is listed on the United Kingdom National List or the Common Catalogue.
(3) An applicant must be a producer established in England.
(4) The package must have an orange label and include the words "Variety not yet officially listed" (if this is the case) in addition to the other labelling requirements of these Regulations.
(5) The person marketing the seed must— (a) retain a sample of each seed lot marketed and keep it for at least two years; (b) record for each sale the name and address of the buyer and keep the record for at least three years.
Restrictions relating to genetically modified seed 12. The Secretary of State may only grant an authorisation in respect of seed of a genetically modified variety under paragraphs 8 to 11 if the marketing and release of the genetically modified material by the applicant have been authorised for cultivation under either— 42


---
(a) Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms(a)), or (b) Council Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 (on genetically modified food and feed(b)).
Marketing imported seed to be labelled as HVS 13.—(1) Seed certified in another member State or third country may be marketed as meeting a higher voluntary standard in accordance with this paragraph.
(2) A sample must be submitted to the Secretary of State for testing, and the Secretary of State, if satisfied that the sample meets the higher voluntary standard, must issue a certificate confirming this.
(3) The seed must be re-labelled using — (a) an official label issued by the Secretary of State if the seed is from another member State, or (b) an OECD label if the seed is from a third country, and in both cases the country of production must be stated on the label.
(4) Seed imported pending inclusion in the United Kingdom National List or not finally certified in the country of production may be verified as being of a higher voluntary standard and re-graded after listing or final certification.
Marketing seed certified in another member State 14. Seed fully certified and labelled in another member State may be marketed without further certification under these Regulations.
PART 3 Certifying seed that does not fully comply with these Regulations Seed not finally certified, harvested in another member State 15.—(1) Seed— (a) that has been produced— (i) directly from basic seed or certified seed of the first generation officially certified either in another member State or in a third country that has been granted equivalence under the Directive relating to that seed specified in Schedule 2, or (ii) from the crossing of basic seed certified in a member State with basic seed certified in such a third country, and (b) that has been harvested in another member State, may be certified if that seed has undergone field inspection for that category of seed and if official examination has shown that the conditions for seed of that category are satisfied.
(2) Where the seed has been produced directly from officially certified seed of generations prior to basic seed, it may be certified as basic seed if the conditions laid down for that category are satisfied.
(3) It must be labelled with a grey label bearing the following information— (a) the authority responsible for field inspection and the name or initials of the member State; (a) OJ No L 106, 17.4.2001, p. 1.
(b) OJ No L 268, 18.10.2003, p. 1.
43


---
(b) the species, indicated at least under its botanical name, which may be given in abridged form and without the author’s names; (c) the variety (in the case of inbred lines and hybrids intended solely as components for hybrid varieties, the word ‘component’ must be added); (d) the category; (e) in the case of hybrid varieties, the word ‘hybrid’; (f) the declared net or gross weight; (g) the words ‘seed not finally certified’.
(4) It must be accompanied by an official document stating— (a) the authority issuing the document; (b) the species, indicated at least under its botanical name, which may be given in abridged form and without the authorities’ names; (c) the variety; (d) the category; (e) the reference number of the seed used to sow the field and name of the country that certified that seed; (f) the reference number of the seed lot or field; (g) the area cultivated for the production of the seed lot covered by the document; (h) the quantity of seed harvested and number of packages; (i) the number of generations after basic seed, in the case of certified seed; (j) an attestation that the conditions to be satisfied by the crop from which the seed comes have been fulfilled; (k) where appropriate, the results of a preliminary seed analysis.
Seed not finally certified, harvested in a third country 16.—(1) Seed harvested in a third country may be certified if— (a) it has been produced directly from— (i) basic seed or certified seed of the first generation certified either in a member State or in a third country that has been granted equivalence under Council Decision 2003/17/EC on the equivalence of field inspections carried out in third countries on seed-producing crops and on the equivalence of seed produced in third countries(a); or (ii) the crossing of basic seed officially certified in a member State with basic seed certified in such a third country; (b) it has undergone field inspection in accordance with Council Decision 2003/17/EC; (c) examination has shown that the conditions for seed of that category are satisfied; (d) it is accompanied by a certificate from the competent authority of the country of origin certifying its status.
(2) The label must be grey.
Marketing extensions 17. The Secretary of State may grant a marketing extension allowing an extended period for the certification and marketing of seed of a variety that has been deleted from the United Kingdom National List or the Common Catalogue.
(a) OJ No L 8, 14.1.2003, p. 10 as last amended by Council Decision 2007/780/EC (OJ No L 314, 1.12.2007, p. 20).
44


---
EXPLANATORY NOTE (This note is not part of the Regulations) These Regulations, which apply in England, implement— Council Directive 66/401/EEC on the marketing of fodder plant seed; Council Directive 66/402/EEC on the marketing of cereal seed; Council Directive 2002/54/EC on the marketing of beet seed; Council Directive 2002/55/EC on the marketing of vegetable seed; Council Directive 2002/57/EC on the marketing of seed of oil and fibre plants; Commission Directive 2008/62/EC providing for certain derogations for acceptance of agricultural landraces and varieties which are naturally adapted to the local and regional conditions and threatened by genetic erosion and for marketing of seed and seed potatoes of those landraces and varieties; Commission Directive 2009/74/EC amending Council Directives 66/401/EEC, 66/402/EEC, 2002/55/EC and 2002/57/EC as regards the botanical names of plants, the scientific names of other organisms and certain Annexes to Directives 66/401/EEC, 66/402/EEC and 2002/57/EC in the light of developments of scientific and technical knowledge.
They revoke the twenty-three sets of Regulations listed in regulation 34 and replace them with a single set of Regulations for the marketing of seed.
Parts 1 and 2 of the Regulations are introductory and set out the various categories of seed.
The types of seed to which the Regulations apply are set out in Schedule 1.
Part 2 contains requirements for marketing seed. In order to be marketed, the seed must comply with the requirements set out for certification, packaging, sealing and labelling (regulation 7).
Schedule 2 sets out certification requirements and Schedule 3 sets out labelling requirements and provision for sale of loose seed. Schedule 4 sets out exceptions to the general requirements.
Part 3 also imposes record-keeping requirements (regulation 19).
Under Part 4, a licence is required to carry out certain operations such as marketing seed (regulation 20). The Secretary of State licenses crop inspectors, seed samplers and seed testing stations to act under these Regulations (regulation 21).
Part 5 sets out administrative provisions (including provision for fees), transitional provisions and revocations.
In accordance with section 16(7) of the Plant Varieties and Seeds Act 1964, breach of the regulations is an offence punishable on summary conviction by a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.
A full impact assessment has not been produced as no impact on the public or voluntary sector is foreseen.
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________ (cid:164) Crown copyright 2010 Printed and published in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited under the authority and superintendence of Carol Tullo, Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office and Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament.
45


---
E8292 10/2010 108292T 19585


---
